In December, significant increases in the prices of tobacco products and other increases in household goods and various goods and services groups adversely affected inflation.
On the other hand, fruit and vegetable prices, which had significantly increased in November, decreased in December to a great extent.
With 7.72 percent, annual inflation was realized close to the target.
VAT cuts made in food, health and education sectors in the first quarter of 2005 limited price increases.
Even if the downward course in the inflation trend continues, the decline in annual inflation may be interrupted in the upcoming months, due to the base effect caused by the VAT cuts and the fact that the price increase on tobacco products in December will also be reflected in the January inflation.
Considering the fact that price increases in tobacco products and oil led to more than 2 points of increase in inflation in 2005, it can be said that the difference between the current trend of inflation and the 2006 target is not significant.
Moreover, the decline observed in the growth rates of the special CPI indices in the second half of 2005 confirms that the downward trend in the main course of inflation continues.
Although some upward movements were again recorded in the said aggregates in December, it is rather early to decide whether this development will turn into a trend or not.
As a matter of fact, inflation expectations also continued to improve in the last quarter of 2005.
As of January 2006, the end-year inflation expectation is 5.7 percent.
Although inflation declined by 1.6 points throughout 2005, inflation expectations for the next twelve months decreased by 2.9 points.
This development shows that the secondary effects of oil prices will be limited, at least in the short-term.
Producer prices maintained their favorable course.
Excluding those items directly affected by petroleum products, it is observed that price increases in the manufacturing industry are at very low levels.
This low level of increase is believed to be related to productivity increases, the strong position of the New Turkish lira and increased foreign competition.
The rigidity of price increases in the services group continues.
In the process of the economic revival and structural transformation, the differentiation in the growth rates of goods and services prices became more evident.
The rigidity in services inflation mainly stems from the continuity in the demand for services and the backward-indexation behavior in services pricing.
Considering the high productivity increases in tradable goods and the structural transformation process in the economy, it may seem normal that the services group inflation continues to be significantly higher than the goods group price increase.
However, the supply gap in the housing sector in recent years and the resulting rapid increases in house prices are observed to exert additional periodical pressure on the prices of the related services items.
This assessment draws support from the fact that price increases in the subgroup of rents within the CPI and in those groups, where rents are significant input costs, are almost at same levels with those in 2004, despite the continued downward trend in inflation.
In this respect, it is anticipated that the price increases in the services group will continue to adversely affect inflation in 2006 as well, due to the structural transformation experienced by Turkey and the pricing habits peculiar to a period of high inflation.
Short-term forecasts made in the light of these evaluations indicate that annual inflation will slightly increase in the first quarter of 2006, but decline again starting from the second quarter onwards.
The data recently released on sales, consumption indices and consumer tendency surveys provide signals for the continuation of the revival in consumption demand, especially the demand for durable goods.
Furthermore, according to Turkstat data, there is a significant decline, compared to the previous year, in the number of firms that cited insufficient demand in the domestic market as one of the reasons for operating under full capacity.
This indicates that the domestic demand is not sluggish at the current level.
The indicators regarding investment expenditures point out that the rapid growth of investments continues.
According to the seasonally adjusted data, increases in production continue in the machinery-equipment, office machinery and electrical machinery and appliances sectors.
The data on domestic sales of commercial vehicles and the import of capital goods also indicate that the revival in investments continues.
In the Business Tendency Survey, the investment tendency and the expectations for credit interest rates expected in the next 12-month period also support the strong growth tendency of investments.
Hence, this situation is considered as a factor that will contribute to the continuation of the increases in productivity despite the high- rated increase in the demand for non-agricultural labor force.
The structural economic reforms should continue for the sustainability of gains in productivity.
The efforts made to reduce the role of the public sector in the economy, in terms of both financial burden and also production activity, constitute an important part of this process.
The privatization performance attained in 2005 will provide a further lift to productivity in a more competitive environment, as well as contributing to the financing of the current account deficit.
The privatizations in energy and communication sectors in 2005 are considerable developments in this respect.
In fact, in the scope of structural arrangements, it is observed that the energy sector has displayed rapid increases in productivity and made contributions to industrial production in a stable manner since 2003.
Therefore, the continuation of the structural arrangements such as the enhancement of competitiveness and improvement of the investment environment, which would boost the increases in productivity, is of great importance.
Industrial production, which is one of the basic economic indicators for economic activity, continues to increase in a stable manner.
The high level of the real sector confidence index indicates that the increase in industrial production will continue, at least in the short term.
However, the fact that capacity utilization rates are at lower levels compared to the previous year, limits the effects of the revival in economic activities reflected on prices.
Considering the fact that the increases in investments continued throughout 2005, a similar outlook is expected in the upcoming period as well.
Despite a relative stable trend in annual increase rates of consumer credits in the last period, they still maintain their high levels.
Declining interests and extending maturities in line with the normalization process of the economy and the deterioration in inflation expectations lead to a reduction in domestic government borrowing and support the credit supply by changing banks’ portfolio preferences.
The financing program announced by the Treasury for 2006 provides significant signals for the continuation of the said tendency in the upcoming period.
The substantial decline in credit interest rates and the gradual extension of maturities caused by the normalization process of the economy made credit utilization more appealing.
Hence, the demand for credit increased substantially.
There is no doubt that these developments that led to an increase in both credit supply and credit demand support domestic demand.
However, it should be taken into consideration that the impacts of intense credit utilization on expendable incomes and the continuation of fiscal discipline are the factors that stabilize domestic demand.
At this point, rapid credit expansion is considered as a development that should be followed closely as to price stability and financial stability.
In conclusion, it is expected that the contribution of demand to the decline in inflation in the upcoming period will remain limited compared to previous years.
Crude oil prices play an important role in the contribution of import prices to inflation.
In 2005 crude oil prices displayed a substantial rise.
Despite a downward trend in crude oil prices towards the end of the year, this trend remained temporary and prices restarted to increase in early 2006.
This development confirms the forecasts that the upward trend in oil prices would also continue to be a risk factor with respect to inflation in 2006.
Even if the current price level of crude oil is maintained, the effects of crude oil prices on inflation through input costs will continue for a while.
Nevertheless, these effects are not expected to deteriorate medium-term expectations.
While making its decisions, the .
Committee focuses on the consistency of the medium-term outlook of inflation with the targets by taking into account the lagged effects.
The period, during which the lagged effects are most intense, covers around one and one and a half year period.
No prompt responses are given to exogenous shocks, the medium-term targets are emphasized and policy response is spread over time.
Committee’s reaction to the increments in tobacco prices in December and to the rise in crude oil prices in January shall be evaluated within this framework.
Likely fluctuations in international liquidity conditions and global risk appetite are regarded as factors that create uncertainties with respect to the inflation outlook.
Due to historic lows in long-term interest rates in developed countries, international funds have been flowing to developing countries that are taking important steps towards stability, such as Turkey.
In the case that this trend is reversed, fluctuations may occur in financial markets.
Even if recent developments provide some signals for the continuation of this trend in 2006, shocks arising in financial markets may have an effect on inflation within the context of current economic conditions in Turkey.
Committee has concluded that the recent data released since the last .
Committee Meeting have not led to a significant change in the inflation and monetary policy outlook.
It is estimated that although the downward trend of inflation might be interrupted in the first quarter of 2006, it would resume its trend starting from the second quarter of 2006.
Despite this downward trend, in the light of current data, year-end inflation is most likely to be above the 5 percent end-year target.
The major reasons behind this argument are the sustained price rigidities in the service sector, the diminution of support provided by supply- demand conditions to inflation, the persistence of uncertainties about oil prices and international liquidity conditions and the fact that the other favorable factors have not been effective enough to offset these negative developments.
As a result, it has been decided to keep the short-term interest rates at the CBRT Interbank Money Market and at the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market unchanged.
In the light of currently available information, short-term interest rates are less likely to move upward in the medium-term, rather than going downward or remaining stable.
In the near future, however, short-term interest rates are more likely to remain stable.
This policy perspective will help inflation stay in line with the target path around mid-2007.
Meanwhile, it should be underlined that any new data and information associated with the inflation outlook in the next period will make the .
Committee revise its stance about the future.
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey has adopted formal inflation targeting strategy as of January 2006.
The first inflation report of the inflation targeting period will be published on the official website of the CBT on 31 January 2006.
In the new period, the Inflation Report will be one of the main communication means of the .
In the quarterly reports, recent economic developments will be explained and the general macroeconomic outlook will be evaluated so as to shed light on the course that medium-term inflation will assume.
Additionally, inflation projections will be presented.
Price increments in tobacco prices, a rise in the transportation and housing group indices due to the developments in energy prices and price increases in the food group due to seasonal effects were the factors that had an adverse effect on inflation in January.
Meanwhile, the seasonal decline in clothing prices continued.
As a result, the CPI developments being in line with expectations, CPI increased by 0.75 percentage points compared to the previous month.
Since the rise in question is higher compared to January 2005, annual inflation increased to reach 7.93 compared to the previous month.
As this had already been foreseen by the Central Bank, it was asserted that January inflation figures did not necessitate a significant change in the stance towards the medium-term perspective of monetary policy.
As the VAT cuts on food, health and education sectors made in early 2005 had curbed price increases, price increments in the mentioned groups might be higher in February compared to the same period last year.
In other words, a slight increase in inflation in February would not be a surprise.
In January, the outlook of the special CPI aggregates has been positive.
Even if an upward trend was observed in the special CPI aggregates in the previous month, generally a downward trend has prevailed in the last eight months and this points to the fact that the downward trend in inflation continues.
Hence, inflation expectations continued to improve in the first two months of the year as well.
By the second half of February 2006, the expected inflation over the next 12 months is 5.45 percent, which is very close to the path that is consistent with the medium-term target.
Producer prices maintained the favorable course.
Manufacturing industry prices, when calculated by excluding petroleum and tobacco products, inched up by a mere 0.21 percent in January and this development is perceived as being positive.
Services prices continue to be a risk factor with respect to attaining the inflation target for 2006.
Moreover, as the share of services groups in the consumer price index has been increased while updating the consumer price index for 2006, the mentioned risks have further increased.
It is observed that the short of supply in the housing sector in the last few years exerts an extra seasonal pressure on inflation through items related to housing prices.
The rapid rises in the prices of the sub-groups susceptible to housing prices (rents, restaurants- hotels, consumer durables) observed recently verify this idea.
Meanwhile, even if the rate of increase in rents, which decreased to 1.31 percent in January 2006 from 1.90 percent in January 2005, can be accepted as a favorable development, it is yet too early to suggest that this downward movement will become a trend.
Short-term forecasts made in the light of these evaluations indicate that annual inflation will slightly increase in the first quarter of 2006, but start declining again from the second quarter onwards.
What is important for monetary policy is the consistency between the medium-term inflation trend and the targets.
Therefore, evaluating elements such as supply and demand developments, productivity and costs is very important.
The sales figures pertaining to the last quarter of 2005 and developments in consumption indices and consumer tendency surveys contain signals that consumption demand, especially the demand for consumer durables, is stable.
Although a slow-down was observed in demand and production indicators in January, this slow-down is considered to stem from the decline in the number of working days caused by the long religious holiday.
Nevertheless, quarterly trends of the indicators in the Business Tendency Survey, which include production, domestic market sales and orders and volume of current work, are observed to maintain their favorable course.
Furthermore, according to the Manufacturing Industry Tendency Survey data, proportion of the firms, which cited the lack of demand in the domestic market as one of the reasons that impede their full capacity, continued to decline.
The rapid growth trend of investments continued in the last period.
According to seasonally adjusted data, increases in the production of machinery-equipment, office machinery and electrical machinery and appliances sectors continued in the last quarter of 2005.
In the same period, the data pertaining to domestic sales of commercial vehicles and imports of capital goods also point to the revival in investments.
Meanwhile, the distortion observed in the data pertaining to economic activity in January, was reflected on the investment tendency for the next 12-month data in the Business Tendency Survey.
However, as the said indicator is still at a high level compared to the achieved level, the investment tendency is deemed to maintain a strong course.
As a result of the macroeconomic stability that increased in recent years, long-term interest rates continued to decline gradually and the New Turkish lira retained its strong position.
These two factors underpin the revival in investments.
These developments ensure the continuation of the increases in partial productivity, as well.
There is no doubt that what is important for the sustainability of the increases in productivity is the increase in total factor productivity.
In this respect, the continuation of structural regulations such as the enhancement of competitiveness and amelioration of the investment environment are of great importance.
Industrial production maintains its stable trend.
The Real Sector Confidence Index maintained its high level despite its downward movement in January.
Meanwhile, the capacity utilization rates being at relatively lower levels compared to the previous year, limits the effects of the revival in the economy on prices.
Considering that the increase in production capacity continued throughout 2005, a similar outlook is also foreseen in the upcoming period.
Another significant point related to the developments in January is the annual decline in exports.
However, when excluded from the calendar effects such as seasonality and working days, it is observed that exports increased annually.
Furthermore, the continuation of the positive course of the expectations that are mentioned in the Business Tendency Survey for the volume of the goods to be sold to foreign markets and the amount of new orders coming from the export market in the upcoming quarter, and the leading indicators announced for February, indicate that the increase in foreign demand will continue, albeit with a slow- down compared to previous years.
Although consumer loans maintain their high levels, their annual rates of increase, excluding housing credits, displayed a stable trend in the last period.
This is considered as an indicator of the stability of the increase in domestic demand.
There is no doubt that the increases in housing credits, which stemmed from structural factors, might continue in the upcoming years.
Moreover, the rapid declines observed in credit interest rates in the past year, are expected to continue to underpin both consumer and corporate credits.
The results of the Banks Loans Tendency Survey for the last quarter of 2005 indicate that the increase in the demand for consumer credits and especially for housing credits will continue.
In this context, rapid credit expansion is considered as a development that should be monitored closely in terms of both price and financial stability.
To sum up, the evaluations regarding supply and demand conditions, point to the fact that the stagnation observed in January stemmed from the seasonal factors and that the increase in total demand maintains its stable course.
The continuance of productivity increases in line with the investment-based growth restricts cost pressures.
Meanwhile, it is anticipated that the support of supply and demand conditions to the downward trend in inflation will be limited in the upcoming period compared to previous years.
Developments in crude oil prices stood as the leading factor in terms of production costs.
In recent months, continuation of the unforeseen volatility in oil prices confirms that oil prices remain as a significant risk factor in terms of the achievability of the inflation target for 2006.
Moreover, the fact that the International Metal Prices Index registered high increases on an annual basis constitutes another risk factor.
Despite of all these unfavorable developments in international raw material prices, the strong position of the New Turkish lira helped restrain the increases in input costs in the recent period.
The risks for the inflation outlook arising from likely fluctuations in international liquidity conditions and global risk appetite are always present.
Historically low long-term interest rates in developed countries in recent years led to the flow of international funds particularly to developing countries that made significant progress towards stability, such as Turkey.
In case of a reversal in these trends, fluctuations may occur in the financial markets.
Although recently the stance of both the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve provide some signals for the continuation of this trend for quite a while, it is a fact that global trends may change very quickly.
The financing structure of the current account deficit has tended to grow stronger recently, which means that the resilience to fluctuations in international liquidity conditions started to increase.
Nevertheless, sustaining the structural adjustments in a determined manner and the continuance of implementations that would encourage direct capital inflow are still critical in terms of medium and long-term perspective.
In the light of the developments summarized above, the .
Committee has concluded that, although there seem to be favorable developments in some cost factors, the data announced recently on inflation and economic activity do not significantly change the outlook elaborated in the Inflation Report.
The forecasts indicate that the disinflation process, coming to a halt in the first quarter of 2006, will resume in the second quarter.
Despite this downward trend, in light of current data, end-year inflation is more likely to be above the point target of 5 percent rather than below.
The cautious approach of monetary policy should be maintained due to the continuation of price rigidities in the service sector, the reduction of the support of supply and demand conditions to disinflation, and the continued risks related to the costs of raw materials.
On the other hand, the decrease in the risk premium has been noted and is being monitored with a view to assessing whether it is going to be permanent or temporary.
As a result of these evaluations, .
Committee decided to keep short- term interest rates (policy rates) applied at the CBRT Interbank Money Market and the Istanbul Stock Exchange Repo-Reverse Repo Market unchanged at the meeting dated 23 February 2006.
In the light of currently available information, policy rates are less likely to increase, rather than remain stable or decrease in the medium-term.
In the near-term, however, the likelihood of policy rates to remain stable seems to have been lessened somewhat since the last meeting.
This policy perspective will ensure that inflation is in line with the target path around mid-2007.
On the other hand, it should be emphasized that any new data and information associated with the inflation outlook will compel the .
Committee to potentially revise its stance about the future.
In February, the CPI index increased by 0.22 percent compared to the previous month and 8.15 percent compared to the same period of the previous year.
Hence, inflation displayed a limited increase.
Since this was an expected development as described in the Inflation Report, inflation figures in February did not necessitate a major change in the medium-term perspective of monetary policy.
In February, the increase in food prices was the main factor that affected inflation negatively.
The main determinant of these price increases, which registered an increase above expectations, can be attributed to the prices of fresh vegetables, which increased significantly due to adverse weather conditions.
The 0.58 percentage points of consumer prices, which increased by 0.97 percent in the first two months of the year, was derived from fresh vegetable prices.
This development is expected to be temporary.
It is also anticipated that the negative impact of the increase in food prices on inflation will weaken in March.
Meanwhile, clothing prices continued to decline in February due to seasonal impacts.
The fact that winter sale discounts are higher in this group compared to the previous year shows that demand and competition conditions continue to support the decline in inflation.
Clothing prices are expected to have a positive impact on consumer prices in March owing to the VAT cuts made in the textile, ready-to-wear and leather sectors from 18 percent to 8 percent.
In February, the developments in the Special CPI Aggregates displayed a positive outlook.
Especially the special aggregates E, F and G, which exclude the alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and energy items, maintained a downward trend in the last three quarters and increases in the said indices remained below 7 percent.
These developments indicate that the downward trend of inflation continues.
Although current inflation is above 8 percent, expectations regarding 2007 indicate lower levels and support the downward trend of inflation.
Meanwhile, the increase made in prices of natural gas used in industry has had a negative impact on production costs.
The annual increase observed in the manufacturing industry price index, which is calculated by excluding petroleum and tobacco products, maintained its historically low level.
The prices of services continue to be an important risk factor for the attainability of the inflation target set for 2006.
Services items increased the said risk, as their share in the CPI was increased by the updates in 2006.
Meanwhile, it should be noted that the annual rates of increase in services items that are susceptible to oil prices have displayed a downward trend.
There is no doubt that the course of the rates of increase in the said sub-items will depend on the course of crude oil prices in the upcoming period.
In light of these evaluations, it is foreseen that inflation will start to register a downward trend as of the upcoming month.
Committee Discussions, the deterioration trend in domestic demand and production indicators were mainly attributed to the very long religious holiday.
Meanwhile, the unfavorable trend in industrial production exceeding seasonal factors is believed to have stemmed from natural gas cuts in the month in question.
Actually, the favorable trend in production, volume of orders from the domestic market, volume of goods sold in the domestic market and volume of work in progress over the next three months signals that the slowdown in demand and production is not permanent.
Moreover, according to the Manufacturing Industry Tendency Survey, the decline in the number of participants who stated that the reason behind working below capacity was the lack of demand in the market.
The Real Sector Confidence Index, which is an important indicator with respect to industrial production, also maintained its stable trend in February.
To sum up, data pertaining to domestic sales of automobiles, vehicle loans, consumption indices and consumption goods imports indicate that the stable course in demand and production indicators continues.
Although the stable trend in investment continues, recent developments in domestic sales of commercial vehicles and developments in sectors producing machinery-equipment, office machinery, electrical machinery and electrical appliances indicate that the rapid rise in investment expenditures might slow down in the upcoming period.
However, due to the reasons explained above, it should be borne in mind that the developments in January and February might be temporary.
Actually, despite the decline in production, the upward trend in imports of capital goods shows that investment expenditures still continue.
However, data to be released in the coming months will provide a clearer view.
Besides the data pertaining to investments in machinery-equipment, recent developments in sectors providing intermediate input for the construction sector points to the fact that the increased activity observed in the construction sector at the beginning of 2005 slowed down relatively as of the second half of 2005.
However, when the level of production of non-metallic minerals, according to seasonally adjusted data, and the strong demand for houses are taken into account, it is projected that the rise in production in the construction sector will continue.
The sustained rapid rise in housing loans also supports this trend.
When the data pertaining to housing permits in the third quarter of 2005 are analyzed, it is observed that the rise in housing construction continues.
To summarize, even if no upward movement is observed in the said data, indicators pertaining to machinery-equipment and construction sectors provide information that the stable rise in investment demand would continue, at least in the short-run.
One significant point regarding total demand developments is the fact that exports once again started to increase in March.
The sustained upward trend in expectations for the volume of goods to be exported in the next three months and new orders received from the exports market according to the Business Tendency Survey, coupled with the leading indicators announced, signal that the rise in foreign demand will continue even if at a slower pace.
Meanwhile, it is projected that the upward trend in imports would also continue and the contribution of net foreign demand to domestic added value would remain limited in the near future.
Although consumer loans maintain their high levels, the annual rates of increase, excluding housing credits, displayed a stable trend in the last period.
This is considered to be an indicator of the stability of the increase in domestic demand.
There is no doubt that the increases in housing credits, which stemmed from structural factors, might continue in subsequent years.
Moreover, the decline observed in the public borrowing requirement in recent years is expected to continue to underpin both the consumer and corporate credit supply.
Rapid credit expansion is taken as a development that should be monitored closely in terms of both price and financial stability.
To sum up, the evaluations regarding supply and demand conditions point to the fact that the stagnation observed at the start of the year was temporary and that the increase in total demand maintains its stable course.
Although employment, excluding the agricultural sector, has rapidly increased in a stable manner since the second quarter of 2004, the continuance of productivity increases in line with the investment- based growth and structural reform process restricts cost pressures.
However, it is expected that the support of supply and demand conditions in the disinflation process will be limited in the upcoming period compared to previous years.
In recent months, the continuation of the unforeseen volatility in oil prices confirms that oil prices remain as a significant risk factor in terms of the achievability of the inflation target in 2006.
The risks to the inflation outlook arising from likely fluctuations in international liquidity conditions and global risk appetite are always present.
The financing structure of the current account deficit has tended to grow stronger recently, which means that the resilience to fluctuations in international liquidity conditions has started to increase.
Nevertheless, maintaining structural adjustments in a determined manner and avoiding implementations that would increase perceptions of uncertainty are still critical under current conditions.
Committee has concluded that recent developments, while supporting short-term inflation forecasts, do not significantly change the medium-term outlook outlined in the Inflation Report.
It is expected that the cut in Value Added Tax rates in the textile, ready-wear and leather sectors, the ongoing productivity increases in the manufacturing industry and the fact that the secondary effects of oil price increases continue to remain limited will favorably affect inflation in the short-term.
In light of these developments, it is estimated that the downward trend in annual inflation will resume starting in March, and end-year inflation will come closer to the point target of 5 percent.
However, the cautious approach of monetary policy should be maintained in view of a likely increase in perceptions of uncertainty over monetary policy, the continuation of price rigidities in the service sector, the reduction of the contribution of demand conditions to disinflation, and the continued high volatility in costs of raw materials.
Meanwhile, developments in international liquidity conditions are being closely monitored.
In consideration of information currently available, policy rates are less likely to increase, rather than remain stable or decrease in the medium-term.
In the near- term, however, the likelihood of policy rates remaining stable seems to have been reduced somewhat since the last meeting.
Committee to potentially revise its stance regarding the future.
As foreseen in the Inflation Report published in early 2006, the downward trend in inflation came to a halt in the first quarter of the year.
Compared to that of the previous year, cumulative inflation was realized at a higher rate for the first quarter of 2006.
However, this development mainly stemmed from the recent high-rated increases recorded in the prices of alcoholic beverages-tobacco, energy and unprocessed food prices.
The growth rate of the index derived by excluding these products shows that the inflation tendency is downwards and the increase in the said index in the first quarter of the year is lower, compared to the same period of the previous year.
This observation points to the fact that the basic tendency of inflation is still downwards.
On the other hand, it is striking that the cut in Value Added Tax (VAT) in March on the textiles, ready-to-wear and leather sectors has not been passed on to the final prices as it should have been.
Moreover, the uncertainties surrounding oil prices, as well as the possibility that the high-rated increases in food prices may persist are considered to be risk factors in terms of short-term forecasts.
High price increases in the services sector, – and especially that of rents – continue to be among the factors cutting down the pace of the disinflation process.
Generally speaking, the price increase in the services sector is foreseen to have a share of 2.5-3 points in 2006 inflation.
In that case, goods group inflation will have to be realized below 3 percent, for the 2006 target not to be exceeded.
However, taking into account the recent high increases in food prices and the costs of raw materials, this doesn’t seem to be very likely.
In the light of all these assessments, it can be said that the likelihood of the 2006 target being exceeded is higher than the likelihood that it will remain below the target.
Still, what is important here is that our forecast for the disinflation process to prevail in the medium-term remains.
As also stated in the Inflation Report published in April, under the assumptions that oil prices remain the same and no exogenous shock occurs in the upcoming period, inflation is foreseen to display a downward tendency in the medium-term.
According to the Expectations Survey data, inflation expectations for the next twelve months retain their horizontal course.
With a 4.67 percent, annual inflation expectation by the end of the next 24 months– a question asked for the first time – is at a level close to the targets for 2007 and 2008.
In other words, economic units anticipate the disinflation process to continue in the medium-term.
Although the annual growth of the manufacturing industry price index has displayed an acceleration trend recently – also due to the increases in oil and basic metal prices –, it is still at relatively low levels.
Seasonally adjusted GDP figures pertaining to the last quarter of 2005 point to the stable course of growth.
The sales and production data pertaining to the first quarter of 2006 support this outlook, as well.
Real consumer loan utilization rates maintain their high rate of increase.
In the same period, seasonally adjusted domestic sales of white goods increased compared to the previous quarter.
Although seasonally adjusted domestic sales of automobiles declined compared to the last quarter of 2005, the data pertaining to February and March indicate that the deterioration observed in January was temporary and the demand for automobiles maintains its briskness.
Moreover, the strong upward trend of the imports of consumer goods also continued in the first quarter of 2006.
In light of the current indicators, it is observed that the rate of increase of private consumption was relatively stable in the previous period but it still maintained its strong trend.
Meanwhile, private consumption expenditures, which constitute the other component of domestic demand, maintain a favorable course.
Some of the indicators that support the strong growth trend in investment expenditures include: In the first quarter of the year, seasonally adjusted imports of capital goods increased rapidly compared to the previous quarter.
Similarly, the growth of domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles continued at a rapid pace in the same period.
Production and imports data pertaining to the sub-sectors of the manufacturing industry; machinery-equipment, electrical machinery and office machinery sectors; give positive signals for the continuation of investment growth.
According to the Business Tendency Survey, despite the decline observed in investment expenditures in the January-March period, they are still at high levels.
Meanwhile, there has not been a significant change in the share of those saying “do not plan any investment expenditures”.
In the January- February period, the utilization of long-term credits from abroad displayed a higher rate of increase compared to the same period of the previous year.
This development points to the continuation of the strong trend of the private sector’s investment demand.
The upward trend observed in the main sector providing intermediate input for the construction sector; other non-metal and mineral production; continued in the first two months of the year.
The share of housing credits in total consumer loans continues to grow.
When the data pertaining to construction permits are analyzed as of the last quarter of 2005, it can be observed that the upward trend of housing construction continues.
In addition to housing construction, the increasing number of construction permits pertaining to industrial buildings is a favorable development for the productive capacity-oriented investments.
Although employment, excluding the agricultural sector, has rapidly increased in a stable manner since the second quarter of 2004, the continuance of productivity increases in line with the growth of investments and structural reform process restricts cost pressures.
The ongoing rapid increases in oil prices and other raw material prices in the recent period continue to pose risks in terms of inflation dynamics.
The effects of oil prices on inflation have constituted one of the main factors that slackened the downward course of inflation expectations in the first quarter of 2006.
If the said trend continues in the upcoming period, the unfavorable effect of oil prices on 2006 end-year inflation will become discernible.
The effect of increases in oil prices has been confined to relative price changes so far, and has not led to any changes of pricing in the sectors that do not utilize petroleum products as direct input.
This fact is reinforced by the continuance of the downward trend in the annual rate of increase in the index excluding exogenous factors such as the prices of alcoholic beverages – tobacco products, energy and unprocessed food.
In other words, current available data show that the second order effects are limited.
Nevertheless, expectations should be monitored more carefully than the previous quarter.
At this point, it should be underlined once more that the Central Bank will give the proper response if the increases in oil and other raw material prices continue and the second order effects become evident.
The difficulty of predicting the course of the global risk appetite and international liquidity conditions stand as another risk factor in terms of the upcoming period.
In the recent period, the improvement in the quality of the financing of the current account deficit and favorable developments in public finance are believed to increase the resistance of the economy to likely shocks.
However, despite these structural improvements, it is known that any likely shock arising from the global risk appetite and international liquidity conditions has the potential to unfavorably affect our economy to a certain extent.
In order to prevent the said effects from threatening price stability, fiscal discipline as well as prudent monetary policy must be maintained.
Besides, avoiding any implementation that would spoil the expectations about economic fundamentals is critical for sustaining the resilience of the economy to exogenous shocks.
Committee has concluded that recent developments do not significantly change the medium-term outlook outlined in the Inflation Report of January.
In the recent period, growth followed a stable course, investments and productivity increases continued and the second order effects of petroleum and other commodity prices remained limited.
The main trend of CPI inflation excluding groups such as energy, unprocessed food and alcoholic beverages-tobacco products, points to a downward movement.
Annual inflation is anticipated to decrease starting from the second quarter of the year.
However, the cautious approach of monetary policy should be maintained in view of the continuation of price rigidities in the service sector, the reduction of the contribution of demand conditions to disinflation, and the continued high volatility in oil prices.
Meanwhile, developments in international liquidity conditions are being closely monitored In consideration of information currently available, policy rates are less likely to increase, rather than remain stable or decrease in the medium-term.
In the near- term, however, new information will be carefully monitored.
Committee (the Committee) takes its decisions in order to ensure the consistency of inflation with the medium-term targets.
Therefore, the important point for monetary policy is the information content of the announced data pertaining to the medium-term outlook of inflation.
Seasonal movements or one-off shocks on supply and costs may cause unexpected jumps in monthly inflation.
Inflation figures may be higher or lower than the expected level, especially in periods where prices of some sub-items such as food and clothing might display high volatility due to seasonal factors.
The information content of the figures for a single month may be limited regarding the inflation outlook in the upcoming period.
Therefore, the monthly data should be handled cautiously.
Accordingly, during the inflation targeting period, the Central Bank set its main communication tool as the Inflation Report, published quarterly, rather than monthly reports.
In this framework, the quantitative forecasts regarding the medium-term course of inflation are revised once a quarter.
Current data are carefully monitored and interpreted along with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report.
The price developments in April can be evaluated from two different aspects; monthly and annual increases: a.
In April, consumer prices displayed a high increase of 1.34 percent on a monthly basis.
Regarding monthly price increases, one of the main factors standing in the forefront is the unfavorable impact of price movements on the food sub-group.
This development stemmed from unprocessed food products.
Meanwhile, it is observed that the price increases in processed food products are at low levels and pursue a stable course.
This observation indicates that the high increases in the food group can be offset by the declines in summer.
Besides, gold prices, which displayed a rapid rise in April, have been one of the factors that led to high monthly inflation figures.
While interpreting annual inflation figures, it should be kept in mind that the prices of items, such as alcoholic beverages-tobacco, energy, gold and unprocessed food, which are beyond the control of the Central Bank, displayed high-rated increases in the previous twelve-month period.
If the growth rate of the index excluding the mentioned products is analyzed, the main trend of inflation is not inconsistent with the medium-term targets.
c. In summary, although the inflation figures pertaining to April were above expectations, in light of the evaluations above, they do not include adequate information that would make us revise our medium-term perception.
It is predicted that in May, the high levels of oil and gold prices along with the recent developments in exchange rates will lead to a rise of 0.4 percentage points in the monthly inflation figures solely via gold and petroleum products.
In other words, exogenous factors will not have a favorable impact on May inflation.
Furthermore, it is difficult to make predictions about the prices of unprocessed food and clothing due to likely seasonal volatilities in May, it will not be appropriate in this month, as in April, to make a specific comment by only considering the monthly inflation figures without taking sub-items into account.
The evaluations above are based on the latest price developments.
The analysis of expectations, cost factors and pricing behaviors are of great importance in the formation of the inflation outlook and the future course of monetary policy.
The latest developments in supply and demand displayed a course consistent with the forecasts presented in the Inflation Report.
The investment tendency remained strong and the revival in demand continued without any acceleration tendency.
Moreover, it was seen that the slow-down observed in production at the start of the year was temporary.
However, the Committee re-evaluated the outlook in light of recent developments in financial markets.
In the previous Inflation Report, it was projected that the downward trend in inflation would continue under the base scenario where oil prices followed a horizontal course and no unfavorable development would occur in the risk premium.
Moreover, it was clearly stated that the difficulty in the predictability of the global risk appetite and international liquidity conditions was still a risk factor.
Actually, as part of the funds previously directed to emerging markets moved to developed countries that is perceived as more secure, this risk has been materialized.
This circumstance has had a negative impact on emerging markets including Turkey and has led to fluctuations in financial markets.
These developments have affected short-term inflation expectations adversely.
However, the fact that the rise in medium-term inflation expectations has remained lower compared to the rise in short-term inflation expectations shows that the confidence in the disinflation process would continue.
Nevertheless, the gap between expected and targeted inflation rates, which tends to expand, is a development that requires a close monitoring for the sake of monetary policy.
At this point, in light of recent developments, the future trend of inflation and the corresponding future monetary policy is of utmost importance.
First, we should consider the short-term outlook.
Due to the recent fluctuations in financial markets, the short-term outlook presented in the last Inflation Report has changed.
The fluctuations in financial markets would have direct effects on production, demand and costs in the short run.
A downward trend would not come as a surprise in the real sector and consumer confidence indices, which have started to improve in April.
The rises in prices of capital goods and interest rates with the fluctuations in financial markets will affect the investment tendency in the short run.
Increased interest rates as well as decreased relative price advantages in consumer durables will shrink consumption demand and imports of consumption goods will slow down in the upcoming period.
However, due to structural reasons, it is estimated that the slowdown in imports of intermediary goods will be limited.
All these factors reduce the probability of a demand-push pressure on inflation in the short term.
Despite the slowdown in demand, inflation might be adversely affected in the short run.
The projections presented in last month’s Inflation Report were based on the assumption that no sharp turn would emerge in international liquidity conditions and that the New Turkish lira would continue to contribute to the disinflation process by retaining its strong position.
However, based on the recent developments, these assumptions have become void, at least for the short run.
Prices of sub-groups under the Consumer Price Index such as medicine, natural gas, oil, diesel oil, LPG, package tours abroad, gold and imported coal are directly affected by changes in exchange rates very quickly.
In other words, it is inevitable that the fluctuations in exchange rates will influence inflation via direct cost channel in the short run.
However, it should be highlighted here that thanks to the reduced inflation rate, the floating exchange rate regime, increased competition, and economic policies focused on stability, pricing behaviors have been changing in the last couple of years.
Within this context, it is projected that the indirect effects of exchange rate developments on inflation would be phased over in time and the total magnitude of the effects would depend on whether the movements in exchange rates are temporary or permanent.
Accordingly, the direction and magnitude of the policy response of the Central Bank may vary depending on whether the fluctuations are temporary or permanent.
The studies that have been carried out at the Central Bank indicate that the indirect effects of exchange rates on inflation start to accelerate the third month onwards.
Departing from this observation, it can be asserted that most of the indirect effects will be contained if the fluctuations in the markets are of a temporary nature.
In this case, inflation will soon resume its declining trend and there will be no need to tighten policy rates.
In case the depreciation in the New Turkish lira gains a long-lasting nature and the rise in the risk premium continues, the unfavorable effects on inflation are more likely to spread to the medium-term and, in such a case, policy rates will need to be tightened in order to meet the medium-term inflation target.
One point should be emphasized with regard to inflation trends in the medium- term.
Despite the deterioration in the risk appetite and international liquidity conditions, many other factors that supported the downward trend in inflation in recent years are very likely to continue to contribute to this trend in the upcoming period.
It is anticipated that unit labor costs will remain limited in the forthcoming period, due to the high labor force participation rate resulting from demographic factors; tougher competition, driving firms to maintain increases in productivity; and structural transformation in the agricultural sector.
Clearly, this anticipation is based on the assumption that the income policy will also continue to be pursued in line with the inflation target.
In this respect, it is expected that the contribution of supply and demand conditions to the disinflation process will continue.
Another factor that supported the downward trend in inflation in recent years is the fact that low labor costs in countries such as China and India restrained the increases in prices of tradable goods through international competition.
Considering the rapid rise of the Turkish economy’s level of integration with the world, it is anticipated that the said mechanism will continue to contribute to the disinflation process in the upcoming period.
The steps already taken and those planned towards structural adjustments in areas of fiscal discipline, taxes, social security and the European Union accession process will provide support to the fight against inflation via expectations.
As long as progress is made in structural adjustments that will ensure fiscal discipline and economic stability, the impacts of exogenous shocks will remain limited.
Although the support of all these factors to the disinflation process is expected to continue in the medium term, none of them ensure that inflation will be consistent with medium-term targets.
The commitments of the Central Bank stand as the most solid assurance in this regard.
It should be emphasized once more that a monetary authority with instrumental independence, whose main objective is to establish price stability, will certainly respond if there are strong indications that inflation could considerably deviate from targets in the medium term.
End-year inflation targets for 2006, 2007 and 2008 have been set at five percent, four percent and four percent, respectively.
In the light of available information, though inflation is very likely to be above the target at end-2006, the Central Bank will give the appropriate response in order to maintain consistency between the 2007 inflation and the target in the medium-term perspective.
Price stability is a sine qua non for macroeconomic stability and sustainable growth.
Significant steps have been taken towards this end in recent years.
The Central Bank will continue to play its part in building on these achievements.
In order to prevent persistent exogenous shocks from threatening price stability, a prudent monetary policy as well as fiscal discipline should be maintained.
It should be kept in mind that the main determinant of sustainable non- inflationary growth is the confidence in lasting macroeconomic stability.
In this context, ongoing determination in the implementation of structural regulations that would further increase the quality of fiscal discipline and continuance of reforms, which would improve the competition and investment environment and support productivity increases in the long term, are of critical importance.
Besides, avoiding any implementation that would damage the expectations about economic fundamentals is crucial for sustaining the resilience of the economy to exogenous shocks.
In consideration of the available information, it should be noted that, although it is still early to change the medium-term outlook, policy rates are less likely to decrease in the short term.
In the upcoming period, policy rate decisions will be conditional on international liquidity conditions, changes in the risk premium and other developments.
The direction and magnitude of policy response can vary depending on whether the effects of fluctuations are temporary or permanent.
It should be emphasized that any new data and information associated with the inflation outlook will lead the .
Inflation pursued its upward trend in May and reached 9.86 percent.
The exchange rate movements arising from recent fluctuations in financial markets have started to affect prices through the cost channel.
It is estimated that the pass-through effect of exchange rates on May inflation, especially through increments in prices of items like petroleum products, electrical appliances, package tours abroad and gold, was approximately 0.65 percentage point.
Unprocessed food prices continued to increase and affected inflation adversely in May, with a rise of 1.33 percent.
Especially the rate of increase recorded in fruits (30.97 percent) was considerably above the past seasonal patterns.
Annual price increases in processed foods are rather lower and more stable compared to those of unprocessed foods, which might indicate that the price increases in food prices are supply-driven.
Prices of unprocessed foods, which usually decrease in summer, have the potential to positively affect inflation in June and July.
Nevertheless, it is anticipated that the annual rise in prices of unprocessed foods is likely to continue above the general inflation trend for a while.
Meanwhile, the monthly increase of 10.88 percent in clothing and footwear, which was mostly attributed to seasonal factors, was another determinant of May inflation.
The effects of exchange rate developments are both faster and higher on producer prices than they are on consumer prices.
Actually, producer prices responded very quickly to these developments in May where the annual inflation increased rapidly.
It is projected that the upward trend will continue in June, as well.
It should be reiterated that there is no policy target designated for producer prices.
Recently published data show that supply and demand developments are consistent with the projections presented in the Inflation Report of April.
The investment tendency has remained strong; the revival in demand has continued without acceleration; and output performance has been robust.
However, the outlook needs to be revised in light of the latest developments.
Due to recent changes in international liquidity conditions, emerging markets, including Turkey have been adversely affected and fluctuations have been experienced in financial markets.
Such a development can be attributed to expectations that developed countries would continue to tighten their monetary policies in response to inflationary pressures arising from rapid expansion of global output.
As this development occurred at a time when the current account deficit widened and coincided with other perceptions of domestic uncertainty, the Turkish economy was affected more seriously than other developing countries.
For a better comprehension of monetary policy decisions, the potential impacts of these factors on the inflation outlook should be evaluated.
Domestic demand, which has been high for quite a while, is expected to slow down in the months ahead.
Price increases in imported goods, rise in interest rates, and increased volatility in financial markets would decelerate both consumption and investment demand in the short run.
With these developments, imports of consumption and investment goods would decrease.
However, it is projected that the slow-down in imports of intermediary goods would be limited due to the high level of crude oil prices and the related structural factors.
Even if the volatility in exchange rates curbs domestic demand in the short-run, exchange rates would not have an adverse impact on growth in the medium-term due to the rise in net foreign demand.
However, the recent developments are not confined to fluctuations in exchange rates.
It is expected that the slowdown in domestic demand, arising from the rise in loan rates, shortened maturities, decreased consumer confidence and increased foreign financing costs, would be more pronounced than the increase in foreign demand.
In other words, the probability of demand-pulled inflation has decreased for the upcoming period.
The slowdown tendency in the rise of commodity prices can be seen as a favorable development for future inflation.
The upward pressure on commodity prices has become more limited as global risk appetite decreases.
Moreover, the increasingly intensifying international competition is expected to restrict the prices of most imported inputs in the upcoming period.
It is anticipated that unit labor costs, which bear significance as to inflation, will remain at low levels in the medium term.
The rapid increases in investments during the last three years will continue to induce further productivity.
Furthermore, the ongoing upward trend of the labor force participation, which is caused by structural factors, continues to be a factor that restrains labor costs.
In conclusion, it is expected that unit labor costs, which are crucial for price dynamics, will support the decline in inflation in the medium term.
January-April 2006 10.
First of all, it is necessary to remember the period prior to May 2006.
The Central Bank had previously forecasted that the increase in annual inflation in the first four months of 2006 would not disrupt the medium-term inflation dynamics.
Even the high inflation figures in April did not change this view.
In April, the number of products whose prices increased in the CPI basket was lower compared to the same period of the previous year.
This was indicating that the increase in inflation mainly stemmed from the temporary price increases in some sub-items rather than the deterioration of general pricing behavior.
Indeed, when the sub-items are analyzed, it is seen that the factors that affected inflation in the first four months of the year were generally beyond the control of monetary policy.
Consequently, monetary policy was not tightened against the shocks related to tax adjustments, oil prices, gold prices and prices of unprocessed food, which generally originate from supply conditions and are of a temporary nature.
Although annual inflation increased in this period, medium- term expectations did not deteriorate, in a manner confirming the consistency of the maintained policy path.
May 2006 and Onwards 11.
However, international liquidity conditions began changing from May onwards, due to the flow of funds from developing countries to developed markets that are perceived to be safer.
In this way, one of the significant risks mentioned in the Inflation Report has materialized and there appeared the need to re-assess inflation outlook and monetary policy stance.
Given the recent financial market fluctuations, the annual inflation figures to be recorded in the next months might further go up temporarily, with the pass-through effect of the exchange rate movements.
Committee has deemed it necessary, on 7 June 2006, to revise the policy rates in order not to let such temporary developments cause permanent effects on the medium-term expectations and pricing behaviors, and also to make sure that the medium-term inflation trend is kept in line with the targets.
It is expected that the rise in annual inflation will continue in June and July and inflation will remain above the 2006 year-end target.
The direct effect of exchange rates on inflation will mainly be observed in June.
Although the downward trend of crude oil and gold prices will partially limit the effect of exchange rates on petroleum and gold prices, annual inflation will rise in June, as well.
In July, the direct effects of exchange rates on inflation will continue with a gradual decline.
The rise in annual inflation might also continue.
The direct effects are expected to decrease remarkably from August onwards.
Given the currently available information and considering that the base effect caused by the tax levied on tobacco products in 2005 will reduce annual inflation by one percentage point, it is estimated that the annual inflation figures of August will be lower than those of July.
In fall 2006, demand conditions are expected to be the main determinant of price dynamics.
In light of available data, the analysis made in the previous part does not foresee an inflationary pressure originating from domestic demand in the upcoming period.
In this respect, it is considered that the indirect effects of the volatility in exchange rates on inflation will remain modest along with the slow-down in domestic demand, and will not reflect upon 2007.
Under the main scenario where monetary policy adopts a cautious stance, expectations are well-managed and fiscal policy is conducted consistently with the inflation target, it is foreseen that inflation will display again a downward trend in the medium term and converge to the point- target set for end-year 2007.
In consideration of these evaluations, the .
Committee has decided to increase the policy rates by 1.75 points.
In light of currently available information, the policy rates are less likely to rise in the short-term, compared to the previous period.
However, it should be reminded that the direction of monetary policy decisions might change conditional on developments pertaining to inflation outlook.
Policy decisions will be based on a perspective in which inflation would converge to the target towards the end of 2007.
Therefore, accompanied by the envisioned decline in inflation, the direction of policy rates would be downward as well in the medium- term.
In the coming period, the Central Bank will continue to closely monitor the factors affecting the inflation outlook as well as the developments in international liquidity conditions.
In this context, policy instruments will be used effectively to achieve the medium-term inflation targets.
Decisive steps have been taken towards macroeconomic stability in the last few years.
Significant achievements were made in areas of fiscal discipline and financial deepening, which are the prerequisites for the implementation of a sound monetary policy.
This enables the Central Bank to utilize short-term interest rates, the main policy instrument in the inflation-targeting regime, efficiently.
There is no doubt that there exist some uncertainties regarding the rate and magnitude of the channels through which monetary policy affects inflation.
However, such uncertainties are not peculiar to Turkey; the central banks in developed countries also face the same uncertainties.
Nevertheless, with regard to the impact of monetary policy on inflation, it can be stated that pursuing tight monetary policy in an economy where there is no fiscal dominance decreases the demand and cost-pushed inflationary pressures in the medium-term.
The recent decision of the .
Committee should only be evaluated within this framework.
Despite the determined stance of monetary policy, there are some risks regarding the inflation outlook in the medium-term.
The tightening process of the monetary policies of The Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan still continues.
In consideration of the available information, it is not possible to say that the uncertainties related to the global liquidity conditions have been entirely disappeared.
In case the global risk appetite declines further and the outflow of funds in emerging markets accelerates in the upcoming period, the Central Bank will not hesitate to give the necessary policy response in order to control the medium-term inflation expectations.
Pricing behaviors have been changing in recent years, thanks to the reduced inflation rate, the floating exchange rate regime, increased competition and economic policies focused on stability.
In the last four years, thanks to the increased confidence in economic policies, inflation targets have become a variable that is increasingly referred to in pricing decisions.
The reversal of this tendency stands as one of the significant risks for the upcoming period.
It is observed that the medium-term perspective has not yet become prevalent in the economy, due to habits inherited from the past periods of high inflation, and thus, the short-term developments still have the potential to cause permanent impacts on inflation expectations.
In this context, the issue of expectations management is still of great importance.
Currently, inflation expectations for next year and the following year are 6.66 percent and 5.37 percent, respectively.
In other words, economic agents anticipate that the downward trend in inflation will continue in the medium-term but they also expect inflation to be above the path consistent with the targets.
In the upcoming period, the impact of the rising tendency of the expectations on pricing behaviors will be cautiously monitored.
It should be kept in mind that price stability is a sine qua non for sustainable growth.
Therefore, the Central Bank will maintain its cautious stance until the price stability perception is firmly established within the economy.
Much has been achieved on the way to macroeconomic stability in recent years.
The implementation of prudent macroeconomic policies played a significant role in these achievements.
The environment of stability should continue in order to avoid a reversal in gains achieved and to keep worries about risk perception limited.
In a period where the global risk perception tends to rise, avoiding any implementation that would deteriorate the expectations is of critical importance.
In this framework, the continuation of the adaptation and convergence process to the European Union and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms related to our economic reform program, as planned, are crucial.
The continuation of the determined steps taken in recent years towards the above-mentioned reforms in the upcoming period will help us to overcome the changes in international conjuncture with minimum fluctuation.
and Short-Term Forecasts 1.
The rise in inflation in the first five months of the year mainly stemmed from supply-oriented factors.
Cumulative increase in the prices of unprocessed food group, which remained almost the same in the first five months of 2005, increased by 11.4 percent in the same period of 2006.
Besides, the pass- through effect of exchange rate movements on May inflation was approximately 0.65 percentage points.
Excluding the said effects, it is observed that the rate of inflation in the first five months of the year is close to that of the same period in 2005.
This observation shows that there were no significant changes in the main trend of inflation in the first five months.
Prices of unprocessed food will very likely make a positive contribution to inflation in June and July.
Nevertheless, it is anticipated that the direct effects of recent volatilities in the exchange rates on consumer prices will persist in June and July and annual inflation will increase during the said period.
Meanwhile, annual inflation is expected to decline in August due to the removal of the effect resulting from the high-rated increase in prices of the tobacco and alcoholic beverages group in the same month of 2005.
With respect to the assessment of price dynamics in the following months, it would be helpful to evaluate supply, demand and cost developments from forward-looking perspective.
In recent months, the revival in production and demand continued without further acceleration, and investment expenditures maintained their strong course.
However, the macroeconomic outlook needs to be reviewed in the light of recent fluctuations in the financial markets that started in May.
Fluctuations in the financial markets, before all else, affected costs of imported inputs.
Even if the ongoing increases in partial labor productivity in the manufacturing industry in the first quarter of 2006 ensured the continuance of the downward trend in unit labor costs, the said trend will not be adequate to compensate the high-rated increase in costs of imported inputs.
As a matter of fact, the upcoming three-month tendency of the average unit cost indicator of the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) displayed a rapid increase in May.
Fluctuations in the financial markets also change demand conditions.
The realizations in consumption and investment expenditures point to a strong course in domestic demand in the second quarter of the year.
However, rising interest rates, the perception of uncertainty resulting from ongoing fluctuations and the relative price increase in imported goods will unfavorably affect domestic demand in the following period.
With rising interest rates and shortening maturities, the rate of increase in credits has already declined.
Expectations in the Consumption Tendency Survey indicate a slowdown in demand.
Actually, the upcoming three-month tendency of the BTS domestic market orders and sales indicators showed sharp declines in May.
These developments are expected to lead to contractionary impacts on the foreign trade balance and thus, on the current account deficit during the rest of the year.
It is anticipated that export performance, especially in labor-intensive sectors, will be positively affected due to the decline in foreign currency- denominated unit wages arising from the depreciation of the New Turkish lira.
Meanwhile, it is expected that imports, which has recorded high increases recently, will slow down starting from July.
Even though no decreases are expected in imports of intermediary goods due to high levels of energy prices, imports of capital and consumption goods, which have recorded high growth since the second half of 2005, are expected to decrease substantially on an annual basis in the second half of 2006.
It is projected that despite of the increase in net foreign demand, the slowdown in domestic demand will be dominant in the short run and the net effect of recent fluctuations on the total demand will be of a contractionary nature.
In this framework, the downward pressure on inflation exerted by demand conditions is expected to increase in the second half of the year.
Although the investment tendency is estimated to lose pace in the second half of the year, the strong investment realizations of the last three years is predicted to continue to support productivity increases in the medium-term.
Moreover, the expanding tendency in labor supply in urban areas stemming from the structural transformation in demographic factors and the agricultural sector will continue to suppress labor costs.
In conclusion, it is anticipated that unit labor costs will continue to contribute to the disinflation process in the coming period as in recent years.
Despite the fact that international commodity prices entered a downward trend after the high-rated increase in May, they still remain at relatively high levels.
Accompanied by the movements in exchange rates, these developments led to an increase in TL-denominated costs of commodities and other imported intermediary goods.
The extent and duration of the indirect effects of unfavorable developments in imported input costs on consumer prices will chiefly depend on the course of demand conditions and expectations.
The second Expectations Survey data for June reveal that the ongoing fluctuations in financial markets have a negative impact on inflation expectations.
Both the annual inflation expectations for the 12-month period and for the end of the 24-month period are above medium-term targets.
Committee considered the deterioration of the expectations for the end of the 24-month period as a significant development.
Decisions of 20-25 June 2006 12.
In the ordinary meeting of the .
Committee dated 20 June 2006, the Committee evaluated the data announced after the unscheduled meeting of 7 June 2006 and other developments and then, stated that there was no significant development that would affect the decision-making process between 7-20 June 2006.
Parallel to this evaluation, the Committee maintained the policy position of the previous meeting.
In the brief announcement made after the said meeting, it was clearly stated that monetary policy would be conducted effectively in the event of an unfavorable development that might affect the medium-term inflation outlook.
In this context, the Committee especially drew attention to medium-term expectations, international liquidity conditions and pricing behaviors, and announced that it will closely monitor developments in these factors.
There were striking developments in international liquidity conditions and expectations in the days following the meeting of 20 June 2006.
The increase in the movements in international financial markets continued to exert pressure on both exchange rates and medium and long-term interest rates in developing countries beyond the extent implied by economic fundamentals.
Meanwhile, Turkey has been significantly influenced by these developments because of the structure of the portfolio held by non-residents.
Furthermore, the Expectations Survey of 22 June 2006 reveals that medium-term expectations are continuing to increase.
Following these developments, the .
Committee gathered on 25 June 2006 to assess the developments and to discuss the measures to be taken.
Members of the Committee have reached a consensus that recent volatility has the potential to affect the expectations and the risk perceptions, and thus disinflation process in the medium term.
And the Central Bank will not allow this to happen.
In this context, it is announced that the Central Bank will start deposit purchase auctions in order to reduce the excess New Turkish Lira liquidity in overnight money market via open market transactions, with the aim of increasing the effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions.
Hence, the need for unscheduled .
Committee meetings has been reduced.
Governor Yılmaz has submitted the regulation, which has been drawn up for this purpose, to the Committee.
Moreover, liquidity conditions in the foreign exchange markets have been thoroughly assessed and shrinkage of foreign exchange liquidity was identified.
Due to the fact that an effectively operating foreign exchange market is a prerequisite for price stability, the Committee has expressed its full support for the effective intervention of the Central Bank Head-Office in order to provide foreign exchange liquidity via its instruments and mechanisms.
At its meeting of dated 25 July 2006, the Committee has reviewed policy rates and has decided to further strengthen monetary tightening in order to improve medium-term inflationary expectations.
Hence, the Committee has showed its determination to fight against inflation and stated explicitly that it is ready to do whatever necessary to achieve medium-term targets.
In the light of these decisions and under the assumption that the cautious attitude of monetary policy continues, the assessments made by the Committee on the medium-term outlook can be summarized as: 16.
The Committee foresees that domestic demand and growth will slow down in the second half of 2006.
Though this downward trend is not expected to reach stagnation level, it is predicted that growth rates will decline drastically compared to the first half of the year.
Despite of the fact that economic activity is expected to recover gradually in the medium term, it will not be a surprise to witness low growth rates in the first half of 2007.
The forecasted contraction in demand will also contribute to the ease of the secondary effects of cost-oriented pressures on inflation.
In this context, the impact of the latest movements in exchange rates on prices is expected to diminish from August onwards.
Even if annual inflation is predicted to decline in August, inflation may display fluctuations in the fall due to intensive seasonal price adjustments.
However, it is estimated that inflation will regain stability and that the main tendency will display a significant decline as of the second quarter of 2007 onwards.
The latest decisions of the Central Bank have increased the prospects for 2006 year-end inflation staying at a single digit-rate.
More importantly, the effects of the latest exchange rate fluctuations on inflation are less likely to reflect in 2007.
In this context, the Committee believes that the medium-term targets are achievable.
Undoubtedly, these assessments rest upon the assumptions that fiscal discipline will continue, the consistency of incomes policy with the inflation targets will be maintained and expectations will be managed wisely.
The effects of the rises in energy and commodity prices and the rapid expansion of global output on inflation expectations in developed countries remained limited until recently.
However, the upward tendency in inflation in these countries is considered an important risk factor.
The monetary authorities of developed countries are growing more and more cautious about inflation and monetary policy.
Committee deems the possibility of sustained global inflation concerns and continued monetary tightening process in developed countries as one of the most important risk factors.
In the event of the occurrence of risk that may lead to further decline in the global risk appetite and new fluctuations in Turkish financial markets, the Central Bank will not respond to the direct effects stemming from relative price changes, but will not allow any deterioration in expectations and general pricing behavior.
Accordingly, the Central Bank will continue to employ all policy instruments effectively in the upcoming period, as before.
According to Committee members, another significant risk relating to the upcoming period is the possibility of deterioration in pricing behaviors.
The studies that have been carried out at the Central Bank show that inflation targets have become a variable that is more frequently referred to in pricing decisions.
Even though the upward tendency recently observed in inflation is temporary, the memories of high inflation are still very fresh.
Therefore, a rise in the backward-looking indexation method or indexation to a variable other than the target in pricing behavior is a risk factor that should be avoided.
The Central Bank’s response to this risk has been to introduce a fast and harsh monetary tightening package.
Even if some short-lived deviations from the inflation target have become likely to occur in case of unpredictable shocks, the CBRT has given the policy response necessary for achieving the medium- term targets and will continue to do so in the future.
If economic units made their medium-term plans according to the target inflation, the magnitude of the response would be smaller and it would take less time to get back on the main track.
The primary objective of the Central Bank is to make the medium-term inflation expectations consistent with the targets, because only then would the inflation-targeting regime have been successful.
The Committee has concluded that monthly price data are sometimes misinterpreted by economic units and that these misinterpretations can lead to irrational deteriorations in expectations.
Especially in the recent period, it is observed that economic units increasingly tend to infer strong judgments on medium-term inflation without analyzing the price data in details.
Therefore, in order to contribute to the accurate comprehension of monthly inflation data, a technical note on inflation developments will be published within two days following the announcement of price indices.
The Inflation Report, assessing the reflections of recent economic developments on the medium-term inflation outlook and involving quantitative forecasts, will be published on 28 July 2006.
Thanks to sustained public fiscal discipline and structural reforms, fiscal dominance is no longer a factor of concern with respect to monetary policy and they also help the Central Bank to use policy instruments more effectively.
It should be borne in mind that price stability is a prerequisite not for only financial stability, but also for sustainable growth.
The ease of uncertainties about inflation will enable the decline of long-term interest rates and this will have a favorable impact on both the financial sector and the real sector.
In this framework, the Central Bank’s focus on price stability contributes to social prosperity in the medium and long run.
The implementation of prudent macroeconomic policies has played a significant role in these achievements.
The environment of stability should continue in order to avoid a reversal in the gains achieved and to keep concerns about risk perception limited.
In this framework, the continuance of the adaptation and convergence process to the European Union and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms related to our economic reform program, as planned, are crucial.
The continuation of determined steps taken in recent years towards the above-mentioned reforms in the upcoming period will help us to overcome the changes in international conjuncture with minimum fluctuation.
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (Central Bank) has started to publish a technical note focusing on inflation developments within two days of the announcement of price indices with the aim of contributing to the better understanding of monthly inflation data.
In this framework, as was stated in the press release dated July 4, 2006, the decline in prices of unprocessed food along with the rise in prices of consumer durables and energy prices due to developments observed in exchange rates became the determining factors for inflation in June.
Thus, the impact of exchange rates on annual inflation in the last two months reached 1.5 percentage points.
It is estimated that the effect of exchange rates on prices will continue to be felt strongly in July and eventually start to diminish as of August.
However, as it will take more than a year to mop up the effects of supply-oriented developments observed in the last few months on annual inflation, annual inflation will continue to be high in the short-term.
The measures taken by the Central Bank in June will ease pressures on inflation in the upcoming period.
Annual inflation of the CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold, which is calculated in order to measure the general inflation trend, increased compared to the previous month and reached 6.1 percent, while the monthly rise became 0.54 percentage points, when seasonally adjusted.
It is estimated that this rate will continue to increase in July also.
Effects of the recent movements of exchange rates on inflation can be handled in two categories as primary and secondary effects.
Primary effects cover mostly price adjustments in prices of goods with a high imported component.
These effects, which are observed as the relative price discrepancy between tradable goods and non-tradable goods, can lead to a temporary rise in inflation.
However, such effects do not change the medium-term inflation trend, as they do not disrupt the general pricing behavior.
Therefore, central banks that act on medium term perspective do not give policy responses to these primary effects.
The secondary effects emerge when the rising tendency of prices is not limited to goods with imported components, but is spread to the entire economy.
Such an effect, which might lead to an uninterrupted rise in the general price level, may mean that the rise in inflation is permanent and in such a case reducing inflation again would be too costly.
Therefore, while evaluating the effects of exchange rates and oil prices on inflation, central banks attach great importance to the secondary effects.
The secondary effects arise mainly through expectations.
Therefore, the recent developments in inflation expectations have become more significant.
The supply-oriented shocks that had significant pressure on inflation along with the rapid depreciation of the national currency have disrupted inflation expectations.
In other words, the risk of disrupting pricing behavior of the entire economy has emerged.
No significant improvement was observed in medium-term expectations as of the first half of July.
Even if it is expected that the recent decisions of the Committee will contribute to improving expectations and curbing secondary effects, there is still the need to adopt a cautious stance.
By increasing the tendency to avoid risks, the recent fluctuations in financial markets are naturally reducing banks’ appetites to provide credits.
Moreover, the rise in short-term interest rates that also boosted the costs of funding stands as a factor that could tighten the supply of credit.
The Central Bank sterilized the excess liquidity in the market via weekly and bi-weekly New Turkish lira (YTL) deposit purchase auctions as well as via foreign exchange sales auctions, which led to a decrease in the amount of funds banks can convert to credits.
This development stands as another factor that might tighten the supply of credit.
The rise in credit interest rates in the recent period leads to a decline in the amount of credit demanded.
The slowdown in credits, which is expected to be observed in line with the rise in interest rates, emerges with a time lag due to the rigidities in financial contracts.
Nevertheless, considering the recent credit developments, it can be said that the rate of increase in consumer credits tends to slow down.
In light of currently available information, the slowdown in the rate of increase in credits is expected to become more significant in the upcoming period.
Recent developments in financial markets have once again underlined the significance of proper risk management by banks, households and firms under the floating exchange rate regime.
In the forthcoming period, the Central Bank will continue to closely monitor banking and credit developments in terms of both financial stability and price stability.
Along with the slowdown in credits, the upcoming three-month tendency of domestic market orders and sales indicators from the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) also showed declines in May.
Supporting these indicators, domestic sales of automobiles rapidly decreased in June compared to the previous month.
Besides, the Consumer Confidence Index also registered a decline.
Meanwhile, it is anticipated that net foreign demand will follow a strong course and especially the activity in the production of the export-oriented private manufacturing industry will continue strong due to continued global growth and the depreciation of the YTL.
The fact that the Real Sector Confidence Index has not registered a significant decline by June and the capacity utilization rates especially in exports-oriented sectors remained at high levels during the same period also supports this anticipation.
As a result, although the Committee projects that domestic demand will lose pace in the second half of the year due to the fluctuations observed in financial markets in May and June and the monetary policy decisions taken, it also expects the strong course of net foreign demand to restrain the slowdown in the economic activity.
Nonetheless, taking the economic activity as a whole in view of sectors sensitive to domestic demand such as the services sector, it is anticipated that the decrease in domestic demand will be more determined than the increase in net foreign demand, and thus the contribution of demand conditions to the disinflation process will continue in an accelerated manner in the second half of the year.
The fact that no significant decline was observed in investment tendency in the recent period is seen as a favorable development in terms of the continuation of productivity increases.
This outlook is anticipated to help keep the secondary effects of exchange rate movements limited.
However, there is still a need to remain cautious regarding inflation given that the oil and other commodity prices are still increasing and the expectations are not yet in line with the medium-term targets.
Being focused on the 2007 year-end inflation target and taking all these factors into account, the Committee decided to move toward a measured tightening of monetary policy and raised policy rates by 0.25 basis points.
In light of the existing risks, the Committee considers that the cautious stance is very likely to continue for some time.
Under this cautious stance, the downward trend in inflation is expected to be significant in the second quarter of 2007.
There is no doubt that the control of the secondary effects mentioned above will depend mainly on the continuation of fiscal discipline and structural reforms.
In particular, in order to attain medium-term targets it is of critical importance that medium-term inflation targets are taken into account in the incomes policy and that the need for unprogrammed public price and tax adjustments is precluded by respecting the limits of budgetary expenditures.
The probability of crude oil prices climbing further continues to be an important risk factor for inflation.
As before, the Central Bank will not respond to the primary effects of increases in oil prices.
However, it is also true that, along with the deterioration of expectations recently, it became necessary to be more cautious about the secondary effects of oil prices.
Should the developments in oil prices affect medium-term inflation expectations adversely or start to disrupt pricing behavior, necessary policy measures will be taken.
The main development that marked the economic conjuncture in the recent period is the fluctuations in financial markets, which emerged due to the change in international liquidity conditions.
Central banks of developed countries may continue the tightening process because of the concerns about inflation and the extent of further tightening is not clear at this point.
This outlook has increased the uncertainties in the global liquidity conditions.
The rapid changes in global risk appetite and the possible fluctuations in the global liquidity continue to be one of the major risk factors for inflation.
In case such a risk occurs, the Central Bank will act with a medium-term perspective: It will not respond to the temporary increase in inflation induced by the changes in relative prices, however it will closely monitor medium-term inflation expectations, as it did recently.
Along with the decline in inflation in recent years, inflation targets have increasingly become a benchmark variable for pricing decisions.
However, the deterioration of medium-term expectations after recent developments, presents the risk of referring to a variable other than the inflation target, such as past inflation, in pricing decisions.
In case such a risk occurs, the Central Bank will not hesitate to give the necessary response and will continue its cautious stance until the medium-term inflation expectations of economic agents converge to targets.
In this context, the developments that might especially affect expectations, such as international liquidity conditions, the course of domestic demand, pricing behavior and the public sector income policy will be monitored closely in the forthcoming period.
Under current conditions, it is of great importance for both price stability and macroeconomic stability that any implementation that would damage risk perceptions and expectations is avoided.
Any step towards limiting the risk perception would reduce the cost of attaining and continuing stability.
It should be borne in mind that the main determinant of the continuation of non- inflationary growth is the confidence in the permanence of macroeconomic stability.
The continuation of a determined attitude towards structural reforms that would increase the quality of fiscal discipline and the uninterrupted implementation of reforms that would enhance the competition and investment environment, and thus underpin increases in productivity in the long term, are of critical importance.
In this context, continuation of the European Union accession process and uninterrupted implementation of structural reforms in the economic reform program are crucial.
The continuation of the determined steps taken in recent years in this context will help the economy to overcome the changes in the international conjecture with minimum cost.
While the Consumer Prices Index (CPI) increased by 0.85 percent in July, annual inflation reached 11.69 percent.
The lagged effects of the fluctuations in exchange rates in May and June on prices, the high increases in food prices beyond the seasonal trend and the continuation of the unfavorable course of energy prices stood as the main determinants of high inflation in July.
While the increases in the prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages group made up 0.39 percentage points of CPI inflation in July, increases in the energy prices accounted for 0.30 percentage points of monthly inflation.
In previous reports and announcements it had been stated that the effects of exchange rates on inflation would be felt strongly.
In this context, the rise in annual inflation in July is not considered as a surprise by the .
Committee (the Committee).
In July, rapid increases in good prices continued.
The rise in prices of the goods stemmed mainly from the high increases in unprocessed food prices since the last quarter of 2005, which results especially from the adverse weather conditions.
Besides, high increases in international oil prices and other commodity prices as well as exchange rate developments became influential in the high course of inflation in the goods group.
Price increases in the services group lost pace partially compared to the previous year.
However, it is notable that high annual increases in prices of rent, hotel-accommodation and transportation services continued.
Considering the fact that rent contracts are generally indexed to past inflation, no significant deceleration is expected in rent increases in the short run.
It is estimated that such a slowdown process will be observed with lag in the medium term.
Meanwhile, prices of transportation services follow a course parallel to that of oil prices.
In July, all Special CPI Aggregates registered high increases.
Annual inflation of the CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold (SCA D*), which is calculated by excluding temporary factors in order to measure the general inflation trend, continued to rise mainly due to the lagged effects of exchange rate movements on durable goods.
It is observed that the recent appreciation trend of the New Turkish lira (YTL) led to a significant slowdown in the rate of increase in prices of durable goods in August.
Moreover, it is expected that certain groups such as fuel oil and gold, which are directly affected by exchange rates, will push down the consumer prices index in August.
As a result of these developments and also in line with the disappearance of the impact of price increases in tobacco products on annual inflation, which was experienced in the same period of last year, annual inflation may decline in August.
Recently available data have confirmed our earlier conjecture that economic activity would slow down, albeit not as significantly, in the second half of 2006 due to sluggish domestic demand.
In the recent period, increases in relative prices of goods with a high imported component and the rise in credit interest rates are affecting demand for durable goods unfavorably.
In July, consumer confidence indices continued to fall in line with the decline in the tendency of spending on houses, automobiles and other durable goods.
The downward trend in credits continued in August as well.
Liquidity shortages in the market, rises in interest rates and the decline in banks’ appetites to extend credits will continue to restrain the increase in credits.
Meanwhile, indicators related to the volume of sales in the domestic goods market and the expectations regarding the new orders coming from the domestic market for the next three months, collected as part of the Business Tendency Survey (BTS), maintained the upward trend in July, which was first experienced in June following the rapid decline observed in May.
This development encourages the belief that the unfavorable effects of fluctuations in May and June on the general consumption tendency may be temporary.
No significant deterioration is observed in the indicators related to the investment demand.
Imports of capital goods decreased in June due to foreign exchange rate movements.
Nevertheless, production volume in the machinery-equipment, electrical machinery and office equipment sectors increased in the same period.
Moreover, one of the BTS indicators, the investment tendency over the next 12 month-period increased in July and August following the slump in June.
These developments support our projections that the unfavorable impact of fluctuations in May on investment would be limited.
The sustained high production level in the non-metallic minerals sector, which provides raw materials to the construction sector, point to the fact that despite the slowdown in housing loans, the strong investment tendency in the construction sector continues thanks to the already started projects.
The rapid increase in exports fuelled by the sustained vigorous economic activity in Europe positively affects the performance of the manufacturing industry.
It is forecasted that the manufacturing industry production would grow at a high pace in July just as it did in June.
It is estimated that annual growth in industrial production will slightly decrease as of August.
The continued rise in relative labor productivity in the manufacturing industry keeps restricting the unit labor costs.
There is no significant decline in the investment tendency yet, and this can be considered as a favorable development with respect to the course of the productivity in the medium run.
To sum up, factors such as the continuation of the rise in investor confidence in July; the continued rising tendency in consumption items other than motor vehicles and housing; the improved expectations for domestic sales and orders over the next three months; and the strong foreign demand all indicate that the slowdown in total demand might be limited.
The effects of the measures taken in June on demand-pull inflation will start to take effect towards the end of the year and will become more apparent by the first quarter of 2007.
Since the impact of monetary policy decisions on inflation manifests itself after a certain period of time, the Central Bank needs to act with a medium-term perspective.
However, the economic units’ tendency to behave in a short-term perspective due to the persistence of their past habits appears as a risk factor that could undermine the effectiveness of policy measures.
It has been observed on several occasions in the past that ascribing undue implications on a single month’s inflation figure without deep analyzes of the outlook of factors affecting inflation and the developments in the sub-items would increase fluctuations in the financial markets.
It should be underlined once more that, rather than short- term developments in inflation, the trends observed throughout an 18-month period perspective are important for monetary policy decisions.
In August, the deterioration in medium-term inflation expectations ceased and moreover a slight improvement was experienced.
Generally, it can be claimed that the survey participants expect a gradual decline in inflation in the next two years.
However, medium-term inflation expectations are significantly above the targets and this emerges as a risk factor in setting wages and prices.
The Committee will keep a close eye on the expectations in the upcoming period and maintain its cautious stance until medium-term expectations of the economic units converge to the targets.
It should be borne in mind that the continuity of fiscal discipline and structural reforms is as important as monetary policy in terms of keeping the expectations under control.
The Committee emphasizes that, in terms of attaining the 4-percent end- 2007 target, it is significantly crucial that the incomes policy must be pursued consistently with the program targets.
Moreover, strict adherence to budget limits without resorting to adjustments in public prices and taxes are critical for attaining medium-term targets.
There are still uncertainties on the contribution of imported cost factors to the disinflation process in the upcoming period.
The volatile course of commodity prices at high levels influences the producer prices.
Even if the relative slowdown in demand is expected to ease the pass-through effect from producer prices to consumer prices, developments in this area are still being closely monitored.
Recently, international liquidity conditions displayed a relatively favorable course.
The fact that US growth and inflation figures were realized below the expectations and thus FED suspended interest rate hikes, has increased the perception that the monetary tightening cycle has come to an end, and which in turn, reduced volatility in emerging markets.
Owing to these developments, the risk premium indicators for the Turkish economy have improved moderately.
Nevertheless, the picture as to the inflation risks in the USA and whether the FED would deem additional tightening necessary or not are not yet clear.
Besides, even if the monetary tightening in developed countries comes to an end, it will not necessarily imply that the global uncertainties have disappeared.
Recent analyses point out the fact that the risk of slowdown in the US economy should not be disregarded.
Under the scenario that this development could happen earlier than expected, it can be anticipated that global economic uncertainties will persist.
In line with the assessments above, the Committee perceives that the medium-term inflation outlook has become slightly more favorable compared to the previous month.
However, there is still need to remain cautious for inflation because oil and other commodity prices are still increasing and the expectations are not yet in line with the medium-term targets.
In the previous Inflation Report, it was stated that a measured monetary tightening might be necessary in the second half of the year in order to be able to achieve the target for 2007.
Committee members made the evaluation that it was still early to signal that the additional monetary tightening is over.
Accordingly, they reached a consensus that in case of developments that may adversely affect the medium-term inflation outlook; the Central Bank would not hesitate – as stated in earlier announcements and reports – to opt for further tightening.
Within this framework, the Committee concluded that maintaining the cautious stance for a while was essential for converging to the targets at the end of the year 2007.
What is meant by “cautious” stance here is a stance where the Central Bank adheres to its tight monetary policy and is responsive to even the slightest negative development in terms of medium-term inflation.
Following the decisions made on June 25, the excess YTL liquidity in the market decreased significantly, and hence liquidity conditions tightened.
The actual level of excess liquidity mopped up by the Central Bank in the o/n market allows the monetary policy to be conducted more flexibly and effectively in the period between two subsequent Committee meetings.
Until the next MPC meeting, short-term interest rates are foreseen to materialize within the 17.50-21.50 band, close to the Central Bank lending rate of 17.50.
However, in case of any extraordinary fluctuations in the markets, the short-term interest rates could be allowed to materialize above 17.50, as long as they remain within the 17.50-21.50 band.
Along with all these factors, the continuation of reforms that would enhance the competition and investment environment and thus, bolster productivity increases in the long run, is still of vital importance.
In this context, the continuation of the European Union accession process, and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program as planned are crucial.
The continuation of the determined steps taken in recent years in this context will help the economy to overcome the adverse changes in the international conjuncture with minimum cost.
The recent deceleration in the rate of increases in prices of the items such as energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages-tobacco and gold, which had played a significant role in the rise in inflation in the previous year, has affected the annual inflation figures favorably.
In August, annual inflation rate declined to 10.26 percent.
One of the determinants of this development has been the removal of the impact of the price increases in tobacco products that had been experienced in the same period of the previous year.
Moreover, the continuance of the partial correction in unprocessed food prices strengthens the view that the high price increases observed in the food group during the last 12-months mainly originated from supply-oriented factors.
The annual rate of increase of the price index that is calculated by excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold continued to increase in August.
The lagged effects of exchange rate movements had played an important role in this rising trend.
Although the prices of fuel oil, gold and technology-intensive imported products declined in August along with the appreciation of the New Turkish Lira (YTL), the unfavorable lagged effects of the fluctuations experienced in May and June on prices are still observable, albeit at a slower pace for many products.
Meanwhile, the increases in prices of the durable goods that accelerated considerably after May slowed down significantly in August, as it had been foreseen in the previous announcement regarding the summary of .
Committee (Committee) discussions.
The Committee members consider that it would be helpful to prepare the public in advance for likely fluctuations in inflation in the upcoming months.
It is expected that the decline in prices of petroleum products and gold will make a favorable contribution to consumer inflation in September.
On the other hand, there might be a temporary increase in inflation in October.
The studies conducted by the Central Bank indicate that especially the prices of processed food are likely to display high increases in the month of Ramadan.
For the current year, it is calculated that the effect of Ramadan will be quite visible in October inflation.
Analyzing the mentioned effect along with other seasonal factors, it is foreseen that inflation is likely to be realized high temporarily in October.
In the recent period, annual price increases in the services group declined, albeit in a limited manner.
The most significant decline was observed in transportation services that were mostly affected by the developments in oil prices.
Annual price increases in the rents and the restaurants and hotels group maintain their high levels by displaying a similar course to that of the previous year.
The annual price increases in these groups are expected to lose pace in the upcoming period along with the slow down in domestic demand.
The recently released data related to the factors affecting inflation indicate that the partial improvement in the inflation outlook has continued.
Leading indicators confirm our earlier conjecture that total demand would slow down, albeit not as significantly.
The fact that the industrial production displayed a rapid increase in July, while, the amount of stock of manufactured goods, one of the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) indicators, has risen at the same time indicates that expectations regarding the demand conditions are not very strong.
The decline in the capacity utilization in the manufacturing industry in July and August, as well as the ongoing slowdown in consumer credits and the contraction in demand for money further support this interpretation.
While the upward trend in interest rates reduces the demand for credits, weakened risk appetite and contraction in excess liquidity in the market limit the credit supply.
Currently available data on consumer credits and confidence indices, as well as sales of automobiles and white goods, indicate that there is a decline in demand for commodity groups, which have a high degree of pass-through from the exchange rates to the prices, such as consumer durables and for sectors that are highly susceptible to financing conditions like the housing sector.
Meanwhile, the leading indicators related to the consumption do not reveal a significant slowdown in demand for semi-durable and durable goods.
While the indicators related to the domestic demand reveal a notable slowdown, foreign demand pursues a relatively strong course.
The continuance of the partial rise in productivity and sustained global economic activity underpins the rise in exports.
The fact that the rise in exports supports the economic activities turns out to be a factor limiting the slowdown in total demand.
The rate of increase in investments that experienced a slowdown due to the changes in financing conditions and the upsurge in the relative prices of investments is expected to maintain this trend in the short run.
As a matter of fact, deceleration is noteworthy in the increase in machinery- equipment production, imports of capital goods and domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles along with the production of the non-metallic minerals sector, providing intermediate input for the construction sector.
Despite these developments, no serious deterioration is observed in the medium- term investment tendency.
There has not been a significant decline in the next twelve month-investment expenditure tendency, one of the BTS indicators.
Given that demand uncertainty is the most important factor restricting investment expenditures, the continuance of the course of the next twelve month-demand expectations, one of the BTS indicators, in favor of those that consider the capacity level inadequate compared to the expected demand over the next twelve months, indicate that firms perceive the recent environment of uncertainty as temporary and that expectations for demand in the medium term are not pessimistic.
The confidence in the economy resulting from the sustained budget discipline and strong course of the long-term credit inflows and the direct capital investments are all considered to be the factors that restrain further deterioration in investment tendency.
Rapid increase in productivity of the manufacturing industry and the resulting decline observed in unit labor costs, continued in the second quarter of the year as well.
As for the third quarter, no significant change is expected in employment in this sector; however the increase in productivity is forecasted to maintain its high level despite the slight decline compared to the second quarter.
In this context, productivity increases are expected to continue in the third quarter of the year as well.
The increases in relative labor productivity mainly stems from capital deepening parallel to the strong course of investments in recent years.
In this framework, the continuation of reforms for the improvement of the investment environment bears critical importance for the increase in productivity and competitiveness, thereby achieving long-term lasting gains in fighting against inflation.
Wage increases in the overall economy stand as another significant development in terms of the medium-term tendency of total demand and unit costs.
The Committee has evaluated the arrangements in civil servants’ wages for the year 2007 in light of the medium-term inflation outlook and reached the conclusion that the impact of this development on inflation expectations and other wage arrangements should be monitored carefully.
Along with this outlook regarding the labor costs, the easing of oil and other commodity prices provides positive signals for the continuation of the disinflation process as well.
The possibility that the world economy may decelerate gives the impression that the rapid increases in commodity prices may stagnate.
The developments in oil prices are especially significant in terms of restraining the secondary effects of energy costs, which have been increasing for a long time.
In conclusion, when the overall supply and demand indicators are evaluated together, it can be claimed that there is an improvement in the medium-term inflation outlook to some extent, owing to both the slowdown in total demand and the easing of real marginal costs.
The improvement in medium-term inflation expectations has continued in September.
In general, the belief in the sustainability of the disinflation process persists.
However, the fact that medium-term inflation expectations are significantly above the targets emerges as a risk factor in terms of wage and price setting.
In particular, the ongoing high course of inflation expectations for the next two years is considered as a factor that should be monitored carefully.
International liquidity conditions, which changed due to the flight to quality effect in May and June, and increased risk perception, triggered the monetary tightening process in emerging market economies.
Recent analyses indicate that the risk of an unexpectedly rapid slowdown in the US economy in the medium term should not be ignored.
In case such a risk materializes, the risk perception will increase in the short term and fluctuations may be observed in the financial markets.
However, since the foreign demand will significantly decline in the medium term in such an environment, the monetary tightening process in developing countries may stop or even reverse.
Within the context of these evaluations, the Committee decided to keep the policy rates at its current level.
Despite the slightly more favorable inflation outlook, it is crucial to preserve the prudent stance in the medium term perspective since the medium-term inflation expectations have not yet reached to the levels consistent with the targets and the uncertainties regarding both commodity prices and international liquidity conditions continue.
The Committee believes that maintaining the cautious stance is essential for the inflation rate to converge to the targets at the end of the year 2007.
Under such a policy perspective, the decline in inflation is expected to be more apparent in the second quarter of 2007 and the inflation is expected to converge to the targets in the medium-term.
In the event of unfavorable developments, which might adversely affect the medium-term inflation outlook, the Central Bank will not hesitate to opt for further tightening.
The Committee defines further tightening in two ways: a.
In case of a development that might cause inflation to display long- lasting deviations from the targets, the MPC might, in line with the general framework of inflation targeting, change the policy rates.
Although there was some improvement in the inflation outlook recently, the Committee considers it too early to rule out the possibility of further tightening.
If an unexpected sudden and major fluctuation occurs in the financial markets before the next MPC meeting that does not comply with the economic principles short-term interest rates in the secondary markets could be allowed to materialize above 17.50, within the 17.50-21.50 band.
The Central Bank does not have the leverage to ease the uncertainties regarding global imbalances.
However, it seems possible to ease the operational uncertainties related to the interest rates resulting from the current liquidity conditions in the market.
Within this framework, the Committee considers it beneficial to share with the public the foresight that short-term interest rates will be realized at levels close to the borrowing rates of the Central Bank in the upcoming months.
Considering both the evident slowdown in the demand for money and the Treasury’s borrowing program, it seems highly possible that the excess liquidity in the markets will continue.
Thus, it is predicted that the o/n interest rates in the money markets will stay close to the borrowing rates of the Central Bank.
In other words, the Central Bank, in principle, will not adhere to the mechanism outlined in paragraph 18, article (b).
The uncertainties related to the global economy will most probably remain on the agenda in the upcoming period as well.
It should be kept in mind that every step taken towards permanent macroeconomic stability would help the economy to overcome the adverse changes in the international conjuncture at minimum cost.
In this context, the continuation of the European Union accession process and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program as planned are crucial.
Moreover, strict adherence to the budget limits without resorting to adjustments in public prices and taxes is critical for achieving medium-term targets.
Annual inflation in consumer prices reached 10.55 percent in September.
While high rates of increase in the prices of unprocessed food products continued to affect inflation adversely, oil and gold prices have had a favorable impact on inflation in September.
Besides these factors, it is considered that the effect of Ramadan was another determinant factor of September inflation, especially through the prices of processed food products.
It is expected that this effect will continue in October price index as well, but food prices might adjust in November.
Prices of food group have been playing an important role in the rise in consumer inflation for the last one year-period.
When the sub-items of this group are analyzed, it is observed that the rise in the prices of processed food products accelerated recently due to the lagged effects of the rise in exchange rates.
On the other hand, the expected normalization in the prices of processed food products is not yet in place.
The fact that the prices of fresh fruits, which had decreased by12.9 percent cumulatively in the first nine months of 2005, increased by 35.2 percent in the same period in 2006 indicates that supply-side shocks are influential in the movements of the prices of unprocessed food products.
The effect of exchange rate movements on consumer durables decreased in September.
It is observed that such effects have already shown up on prices of electrical and non-electrical appliances and automobiles to a great extent, while the rapid rise in the prices of furniture group continues.
It is expected that the price inflation of the furniture group will decelerate in the upcoming period as well, in line with the improvement in cost conditions and the slowdown in domestic demand.
High course of increase in the annual prices of services group continued in September as well.
In particular, house rents and hotel-accommodation group prices continued to rise rapidly due to the backward indexation behavior.
It is predicted that transportation services prices, which are quite susceptible to oil prices, will contribute favorably to the inflation in the upcoming period.
The annual rise in Special CPI Aggregate excluding the prices of energy, unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold, which has started to be published as the “ÖKTG-H index” by TURKSTAT beginning from September, continued to accelerate.
As this development had already been foreseen by the Central Bank, it was not perceived as new information that could affect the monetary policy decision-making process.
As the share of durable goods in this index is quite high, it is affected considerably by the fluctuations in the exchange rates.
Although, it is predicted that, due to the improvements in the cost factors and the deceleration of domestic demand, the monthly increases of the aforementioned indicators will tend to slow down in the upcoming months, the high course of the annual increases is expected to continue for the time being.
There is a significant deceleration in the demand for private expenditure groups such as durable goods and housing that are responsive to interest rates.
Moreover, developments in credit aggregates confirm the slowdown in the domestic demand.
Especially, increase in consumer loans lost pace in the recent months.
While housing loans and credit cards show a moderate increase, automobile credits are in a decreasing trend.
The increase in the total consumer loans mostly stemmed from the loans, which are extended in low amounts with shorter maturity but higher interest rates compared to the housing and automobile loans.
External demand is relatively strong, albeit not as much as expected.
The continued increase in partial productivity and the relatively robust world economy continues to support the rise in exports.
Public sector incomes policy is another important factor for the medium- term inflation outlook.
Increase in the wages of public sector has a crucial role in shaping the inflation expectations.
According to the national income statistics announced by the TURKSTAT, almost half of the labor force payments come from the public sector.
Thus, wages in the public sector are also important with regard to the demand-push effects.
Within this framework, the wages awarded to the civil service servants for 2007 will not be able to support the disinflation process.
Due to the persistence of the increase in productivity and the rise in wages remaining limited, the decline in the unit labor costs in the private manufacturing industry continued.
Compared to the same period in the previous year, the unit labor costs decreased by 8.1 percent in the second quarter of 2006.
However, in case the increase in the real wages of the public sector in the upcoming period becomes a precedent for the private sector, the decline in the real unit wages of the private manufacturing industry will be lower compared to the previous periods.
It is considered that the deceleration in aggregate demand in the second half of the year will be limited due to both the high level of increase in public expenditure items and the relatively strong course of the net foreign demand.
Thus, although the industrial production in July and August and the seasonally adjusted data on capacity utilization rates of the July- September period are at lower levels compared to the second quarter of the year, they do not point to a significant slowdown in economic activities.
In addition, Committee members evaluated that the past policy measures had not been significantly effective on economic activity yet and that the lagged effects should be monitored closely in the upcoming months.
The continuation of the improvement of inflation expectations is considered as a favorable development.
Nonetheless, the fact that medium term inflation expectations continue to remain high above the targets necessitates the monetary policy to preserve its cautious stance.
Rapid increases in oil prices came to a halt in recent months.
As a result of these developments, the price increases in transportation services lost momentum.
However, the fact that there will be some lagged effects of the past increases in oil prices on natural gas and electricity prices indicate that energy prices will continue to affect inflation unfavorably in the upcoming period.
The medium term inflation target of the Central Bank is set as 4 percent.
In order to achieve this target, monetary policy instruments will be used effectively.
Nevertheless, there exist important risk factors that might slow down the disinflation process in the upcoming period.
Committee members highlighted the fact that the current level of the credit interest rates, which are the most important determinant of domestic demand, is considerably high compared to the first half of 2006 and assessed that this development will continue to constrain the credit demand of individuals and firms in the upcoming period.
However, considering the facts that the impact of the upward trend of non-interest public expenditures on the 2007 inflation is not clear and there exist other uncertainties regarding the monetary transmission mechanism, it should be borne in mind that the disinflation process may materialize at a slower pace than anticipated.
In case such a risk materializes, in terms of achieving the medium term targets, it might be necessary to maintain the current tight stance of the monetary policy for a long time.
The likely changes in global risk appetite and the new fluctuations that might emerge in financial markets continue to be one of the main risk factors that might deteriorate the inflation outlook.
The available indicators regarding the US economy point to a gradual slowdown.
This has contributed to the improvement in the short-term inflation outlook by limiting the increases in oil prices.
On the other hand, it should be taken into account that a rapid slowdown in the US economy more than expected may lead to a temporary deterioration in the risk appetite.
In case such a risk materializes and the medium-term expectations are affected unfavorably, the CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy through effective liquidity management or policy rate revisions.
that may arise from high course of medium-term inflation expectations and the persistence of the backward-looking pricing behavior in the services group stand as another factor leading to uncertainties in terms of inflation outlook.
The services inflation, which is currently around 12 percent, is anticipated to decrease further in a certain extent next year in line with the slowdown expected in domestic demand.
However, the possibility that the stickiness in services inflation may be higher than expected, due to the continuation of backward-looking pricing behavior and other structural factors emerges as a risk element.
The fact that incomes policy set for 2007 stipulates high increases in wages augments the risks regarding services prices.
As a result, the Committee has decided to keep policy rates unchanged and maintain the current cautious stance.
However, the factors such as the continued presence of a gap between the medium-term inflation expectations and the targets, the emergence of new risks related to services prices and the continuation of uncertainties in the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain cautious in the medium term.
In light of these developments, the Committee perceives that maintaining the cautious stance is necessary for the inflation rate to converge to the 2007 year-end targets.
The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary tightening that has been carried out since June.
In addition, the impact of the incomes policy and the non-interest public sector expenditures on the 2007 inflation are closely monitored as well.
The CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy, in case developments with unfavorable effects on medium-term inflation outlook are observed.
The continuation of the European Union accession process and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program as planned are still crucial in terms of medium and long-term outlook.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas will help the economy to overcome the adverse changes in the international conjuncture at minimum cost.
In October, annual inflation in consumer prices decreased compared to the previous month and became 9.98 percent.
The partial correction in unprocessed food prices was the main determinant of this improvement in annual inflation.
In addition, developments in oil prices contributed to the favorable inflation outlook in October.
The annual rise in Special CPI Aggregate excluding the prices of energy, unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold, which has started to be published as the -H index by TURKSTAT beginning from September, continued to accelerate in October, reaching1.82 percent, around two-thirds of which originated from the clothing and the apparel prices.
The clothing prices, which increased at a higher rate compared to the same period of the previous year, point to the fact that the unfavorable price movements are attributable to the lagged effects of the exchange rate pass- through as well as to the seasonal factors.
It is anticipated that the monthly rate of increase of the H index will decelerate starting from December, while the annual rate of increase will continue to be at high levels for a slightly longer period of time.
It is calculated that the cumulative exchange rate pass-through impact on annual inflation of the durable goods prices reached 5.5 percentage-points since the volatility in the financial markets in May–June period.
It is assessed that the lagged effects of exchange rate pass-through on the prices of the durable goods group are almost complete as of November.
However, the impact of the pass-through is expected to be visible on annual inflation for around one year.
High rates of increase in prices of the services group continued in October as well.
However, it is expected that the moderation in domestic demand may drive the annual inflation in the services group down in the upcoming period.
On the other hand, the relatively low level of productivity in the services sector compared to internationally competitive goods together with the strong backward looking component in the pricing behavior of this group constitute a risk factor in terms of achieving the medium-term targets.
The effect of Ramadan on unprocessed food products have completely disappeared as of November.
Nevertheless, as stated in the “October Price Developments” report, the weather conditions may have a negative impact on November inflation through unprocessed food prices.
However, it is expected that the aforementioned effect will be temporary and will not alter the main inflation outlook.
Committee (the Committee) considers that recent data is consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report.
The indicators point to a significant slowdown in the private domestic demand, especially on interest rate sensitive sectors such as durable goods and housing.
In seasonally adjusted terms, automobile sales registered a remarkable decline in the third quarter compared to the previous one.
Furthermore, developments in consumer loans and demand for money confirm the deceleration in domestic demand.
Foreign trade data point to a deceleration in demand as well since the recently available data reveal the fact that imports of consumer goods have declined both in annual terms and in terms of the seasonally adjusted monthly data, which can mainly be attributed to developments in consumer durables.
Imports of consumer durables are declining, whereas the increase in imports of other consumer goods still continues.
Meanwhile, according to the Business Tendency Survey (BTS), there is no decline in domestic demand expectations over the next three months in terms of seasonally adjusted data.
This indicates that expectations are not pessimistic.
Foreign demand continues to be relatively strong.
Although some degree of deceleration was observed in the export growth in October due to the impact of Ramadan and the religious feast, leading indicators of November reveal that this is temporary and the strong course of the external demand is preserved.
The sustained increase in partial productivity and vigorous economic activity in the European Union continue to support the rise in exports.
The high primary budget surpluses have supported the disinflation process to a large extent during the past years.
However, considering the current level of inflation, the composition of the primary budget balance in terms of the incomes and expenditures items is as crucial as the primary budget balance itself Opting for making adjustments in expenditures rather than raising indirect taxes to meet any additional resource requirements that may arise in line with the primary surplus targets will help to fight inflation.
Moreover, reflecting the rise in the imported input costs of goods produced by State Economic Enterprises on prices immediately will enhance the predictability and alleviate future risks regarding inflation.
In sum, it is considered that the slowdown in total demand will not be as sharp due to both the high level of increases in public expenditure items and the relatively strong course of net foreign demand.
As a matter of fact, the recent data on industrial production and capacity utilization rates indicate that the deceleration in overall economic activities is not that severe.
Nevertheless, Committee members drew attention to the risk that the slowdown in total demand might be more significant than expected, should exports display a weaker performance than predicted.
In this framework, the developments in the foreign demand will be closely monitored along with developments in domestic demand.
The tightening in financing conditions, the increase in the relative prices of investment goods and the anticipation of a deceleration in domestic demand caused a loss of pace in investment demand in the second half of the year.
Seasonally adjusted data on the imports of capital goods and domestic sales of commercial vehicles display a decline in the third quarter compared to the previous one.
However, the BTS results indicate that, there is no obvious deterioration in investment expenditure tendency for the next twelve-month period as of October 2006.
In other words, the stable investment tendency is expected to continue in line with the expectation that macroeconomic stability will be permanent in the medium-term.
There has been a decline in unemployment rates in the last three months.
Given that labor force participation and employment rates follow a relatively low course, it is considered that this decline in unemployment rates does not exert pressure on wages and inflation.
On the other hand, deterioration in the expectations of both the households and firms relating to the employment in the near future is indicative of the fact that the conditions in the labor market might support the disinflation process.
Inflation expectations continue to improve in November, albeit at a slower pace.
The expectation that the inflation will follow a declining trend in the upcoming period remains strong.
Nonetheless, the fact that medium term inflation expectations continue to remain considerably above the targets necessitates monetary policy to preserve its cautious stance.
Rapid increases in oil prices have come to a halt in recent months, although on the other hand, the high level of oil prices continues to exert pressure on costs.
The accumulated past increases in oil prices have started to be effective on natural gas prices.
At this point, it should be noted that the Committee took those lagged effects into consideration beforehand, and any likely changes in the electricity prices as well while forming its monetary policy perspective Committee.
The Committee evaluates that the impact of tightening monetary policy has already started to manifest itself on economic activity and that it is expected to be observed on inflation in a lagged manner.
Nevertheless, given that the impact of the upward trend of non-interest public expenditures on price dynamics is not clear, the inflation expectations continue to follow a high course relative to the targets and the uncertainties relating to the services price inflation still prevail, there emerges the risk of higher-than-expected inflation inertia.
Should such a risk materialize, it may be necessary to maintain the current tight stance of monetary policy for a long time in terms of achieving medium term targets.
Any likely changes in the global risk appetite and the new fluctuations that might emerge in financial markets accordingly continue to be one of the main risk factors that might deteriorate the inflation outlook.
If such a risk materializes and medium-term expectations are affected unfavorably, the CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy through effective liquidity management or policy rate revisions.
In the light of these developments, the Committee assesses that meeting the medium-term inflation targets would necessitate the maintenance of the cautious policy and decided to keep policy rates unchanged.
However, the factors such as the gap between medium-term inflation expectations and the targets, the risks related to the services price inflation and the uncertainties in the global economy require the monetary policy to maintain its tight stance.
The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary tightening since June.
In addition, potential impacts of the recent developments in the incomes policy and the non-interest public sector expenditures are carefully evaluated.
The CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy, in case of any new developments that would have unfavorable effects on medium-term inflation outlook.
The continuation of the European Union accession process and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program as planned are still crucial in terms of the medium and long- term outlook.
While the consumer inflation increased by 1.29 percent in November, the annual inflation decreased compared to the previous month.
The seasonal increases in unprocessed food and clothing and footwear group prices played an important role in consumer inflation in November.
Price increases in these groups comprised about 0.94 percent of consumer inflation of November.
Meanwhile, housing group-oriented energy items displayed increases as well.
There has been some decline in the prices of consumer durables due to the effects of the deceleration in domestic demand and the stable course of the exchange rates.
Committee (Committee) noted that uncertainties pertaining to unprocessed food prices continued.
The rate of increase in unprocessed food prices displayed a significant deceleration in the last few months.
However, the adverse weather conditions coupled with the decrease in agricultural production, especially in grain production, may affect food prices negatively in the upcoming period.
Within this framework, food prices continue to be a risk factor for inflation.
The annual rise in the special CPI Aggregate-H excluding the prices of energy, unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold, reached 9.13 percent in November, remaining relatively stable compared to the previous month.
As the increases in the prices of clothing group in the new season has terminated, the primary effects of the exchange rates were completed to a great extent as of December.
It is projected that the monthly increases in H-index would decelerate in the upcoming period compared to the second half of 2006.
However, it will take longer for the effects of supply shocks that have been experienced in the previous period on annual change to diminish.
Accordingly, no significant decrease is expected in inflation that is calculated by the H- index until the second half of 2007.
The annual rate of increase in services prices still preserves its course.
The house rents item, which continued to increase rapidly in November, constrained the deceleration in services prices inflation.
In line with the decrease in domestic demand, annual price inflation in services group is expected to slowdown in the upcoming period.
Meanwhile, taking into account the fact that the pricing behavior in services sector is highly susceptible to wages, it is believed that services prices continue to be a significant risk factor in terms of attaining the medium-term targets.
The Committee considers that recent data is broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.
Indicators pertaining to private sector consumer demand point to a significant slowdown.
The decline in expenditures especially on consumer durables and investment goods stands as an important factor in the deceleration of consumer demand.
In line with the deceleration in domestic demand, annual GDP growth decreased to 3.4 percent in the third quarter, confirming our earlier projections that demand conditions would support the decline in inflation.
The deceleration in consumer demand in the third quarter can be attributed both to the decline in consumer confidence and the fluctuations in the exchange rates.
The decline in private consumption demand halted as these effects started to disappear as of the fourth quarter.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the decline in automobile sales observed in the third quarter stopped in October-November period.
The upward trend of sale of white goods continued in this period as well.
Consumer credits and consumption indices indicate that the tendency to lose pace stagnated in November.
The indicators in the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) related to the volume of sales in the domestic goods market and the expectations regarding the amount of new orders received from the domestic market for the next three months do not point out a slowdown in private consumption demand beyond the third quarter.
The foreign demand remains relatively strong.
Due to the fact that exports increased faster than imports in real terms in the third quarter of 2006, net exports had a favorable impact on growth.
Indicators pertaining to November and December 2006 indicate that the strong course of foreign demand continues.
Persistence of increases in partial productivity, continuation of the vigorous economic activity in the EU, and the Euro gaining strength against the US dollar support the increase in exports.
Foreign demand is expected to keep its strong position in 2007 as well.
The value added of the industrial sector continued to increase in the third quarter of the year with the help of strong foreign demand.
Even though the rate of industrial production in October was low due to the effect of the religious holiday in Ramadan, expectations of companies operating in production industry and increase in utilization ratios in November indicate that industrial production will display a strong trend in the fourth quarter as well.
The tightening in financing conditions, the increase in the relative prices of investment goods and the anticipation of a deceleration in domestic demand caused the investment demand to slowdown in the second half of the year.
Seasonally adjusted data on the imports of capital goods and sales of commercial vehicles displayed an upward trend recently, thereby indicating a possible recovery in the machinery-equipment investments in the last quarter of the year.
The BTS indicators support this outlook by suggesting that there is no obvious deterioration in investment expenditure tendency for the next twelve- month period.
Construction permit statistics point out that construction investments will continue to grow.
Even though it is remarkable that the production of non-metal minerals – which is one of the leading indicators of construction activities – has decelerated, considering the fact that exports have declined and imports have increased recently in this sector, the strong course of the construction sector is expected to persist.
The public sector expenditures continued to increase in the third quarter of 2006 and a similar tendency is anticipated for the last quarter as well.
The Committee closely monitors the effects of the adjustments in the incomes policy and the developments in non-interest public sector expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations.
In summary, it is predicted that the deceleration in the economy will not reach the level of stagnation and the economic activity will gradually recover.
In the last quarter of 2006, the level of annual growth might be low due to the high basis effect in the same period of 2005.
However, owing to the relatively strong course of foreign demand and increases in public sector expenditure items, the slowdown in total demand is not expected be sharp and the annual growth rates are estimated to increase beginning from the second half of 2007.
Productivity increases in private manufacturing industry continued in the third quarter of the year.
In the last quarter, the manufacturing industry workers index is not expected to display a significant change, while the increase in production is estimated to strengthen slightly.
In this framework, it is expected that the increases in productivity will persist in the last quarter of the year, as well and that unit wages in the manufacturing industry will continue to support the disinflation process.
The expectations that the main course of inflation will be downward in the upcoming period remained strong in December, as well.
The inflation expectations that displayed a scattered outlook in June and July gained a more consistent structure as of December.
This development is considered to be an indicator of the diminishing uncertainties regarding inflation.
Nonetheless, medium term inflation expectations continue to remain high above the targets.
The current level of inflation is well above the medium term targets.
It is expected that the tight stance of the monetary policy will continue to restrain the private consumption demand and pull down inflation gradually.
Nevertheless, the ambiguities relating to the impact of the upward trend in non-interest public expenditures on price dynamics together with the persistence of both high expectations and uncertainties regarding services prices create the risk that inflation will display stronger resistance against the disinflation process than expected.
The CBRT produces its medium term forecasts under the assumption that supply shocks will vanish in time.
However, the current data indicates that neither the risks related to energy prices nor those related to unprocessed food prices disappeared.
As long as medium term expectations are not affected unfavorably, the CBRT will not respond to the temporary fluctuations deriving from these two factors that are beyond its control.
The likely changes in the global risk appetite and the new fluctuations that might emerge in financial markets accordingly continue to be one of the main risk factors that might deteriorate the inflation outlook.
In case such a risk materializes and medium-term expectations are affected unfavorably, the CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy through effective liquidity management or policy rate revisions.
In the light of these developments, the Committee assesses meeting the medium term inflation targets would necessitate the maintenance of the cautious policy stance and decided to keep policy rates unchanged.
Factors such as the gap between the medium-term inflation expectations and the targets, the risks related to services price inflation and the uncertainties in the global economy require that the monetary policy maintain its tight stance.
Moreover, the potential impact of the progress in the structural reform agenda and the developments in the incomes policy as well as the non- interest public sector expenditures on the inflation and the inflation expectations are carefully evaluated.
The CBRT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy in case developments that would have unfavorable effects on medium-term inflation outlook.
The continuation of the European Union accession process and the uninterrupted implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program as planned are still crucial.
The developments related to the structural reforms that will enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium and long terms are monitored closely in terms of both macroeconomic and price stabilities.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in recent years will help the economy overcome the adverse changes in the international conjuncture at minimum cost.
Inflation continued its recent downward course in December and declined to 9.65 percent at the end of the year.
The main determinant of consumer price developments in December is the decline in clothing and footwear prices that is beyond seasonal trends.
On the other hand, the annual rate of inflation in unprocessed food prices increased.
Meanwhile, owing to the stable course of the New Turkish Lira and the slowdown in demand, the decline in annual inflation of durable goods prices continued in December.
Committee (The Committee) has noted that uncertainties regarding unprocessed food prices continue.
The deceleration in the rate of increase in unprocessed food prices in the last few months came to a halt in December.
Persistence of adverse weather conditions coupled with the recent slump in agricultural production, especially in grain production, may have an adverse effect on food prices in the upcoming period.
Within this framework, the Committee considers that food prices continue to be a risk factor for inflation.
The Committee has also noted that the decline in oil prices affected the inflation outlook favorably.
Fuel oil prices decreased by 10.18 percent in the August- November period.
However, energy prices related to the housing group increased by 3.19 percent in the last quarter due to the rapid increases in the prices of natural gas and solid fuel items and this caused energy inflation to rise in the last two months of the year.
The Committee concludes that the recent favorable developments in oil prices are not yet significant enough to change the medium-term inflation outlook, given that there is still a considerable amount of uncertainty regarding oil prices and lagged effects of the past cumulative price increases.
The annual rate of increase of the special CPI Aggregate-H (CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold) declined to 8.89 percent in December.
This development can be attributed to the decline in clothing and footwear prices that is beyond seasonal trends, and by the significant decrease in prices of durable goods.
Although it is projected that the monthly rate of changes in the H-index may exhibit some volatility in the upcoming period due to seasonal price movements, the overall trend is expected to be downwards in the medium term.
In 2006, the decline in annual inflation of services was quite limited, due to the persistent high inflation in the prices of rents and accommodation services.
The possibility of the continuance of this trend in the upcoming period emerges as a risk factor for disinflation.
The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.
The slowdown in private consumption demand continues.
After declining sharply in the third quarter as a result of depreciation of the YTL, increasing credit interest rates, and lower consumer confidence, the demand for durable goods increased moderately in the fourth quarter.
Although seasonally adjusted data suggest that automobile sales are stronger than the previous quarter, the annual growth rate still remains negative.
The data for the October-November period indicate a modest increase in white goods sales compared to the third quarter.
Business Tendency Survey (BTS) indicators also point to a sluggish recovery in private consumption in the last quarter of 2006.
Although consumer credit, which had stopped its rapid growth in the third quarter in line with the rise in interest rates, has shown some tendency to recover in the fourth quarter, there is still a significant slowdown in the rate of increase in consumer credit in annual terms.
While housing loans grow at a low rate, vehicle loans continue to decline in real terms.
These developments are in line with the slowdown in private consumption demand.
The recent rise in credit utilization stems mainly from items other than housing and vehicle credits.
This suggests that the coincidence of the New Year and the religious feast holidays has caused consumers to use consumer credits and credit cards intensively to meet their increased expenses.
In other words, the recent hike in consumer credit does not point to a rebound; it can be largely explained by seasonal factors.
External demand remains relatively strong.
The net exports made a positive contribution to overall economic activity in the second half of the year.
Sustained increases in labor productivity coupled with the robust economic activity in the EU, and the euro’s strength against the US dollar support the export growth.
The leading indicators pertaining to January suggest that external demand remains strong as of early 2007.
Industrial production continued to increase during the last quarter of 2006 with the help of strong external demand.
The high annual growth rate in industrial production in November can be explained by the higher number of working days compared to the same month of the previous year, due to the lunar- calendar-based religious holiday.
However, the seasonally adjusted figures point to a rise in production as well.
The high capacity utilization ratios in manufacturing industry in December and the benign expectations of companies indicate that the rise in industrial production continued in December as well, pointing that industrial production has kept growing in the last quarter of 2006.
Moreover, according to the BTS, the companies’ expectations for production volume for the next three months in seasonally adjusted terms also exhibit positive signals for industrial production.
The tightening in financial conditions, the increase in the relative prices of investment goods and the expectation of deceleration in domestic demand caused investment demand to slowdown in the second half of the year.
The leading indicators pertaining to investment demand point to a rise in investment in the last quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
Sales of commercial vehicles increased in the last quarter compared to the third quarter.
Imports of capital goods, as well as production and imports of machinery-equipment, office equipment, and electrical machinery and appliances in the October-November period exceeded those in the third quarter.
The statistics on the construction permits and non-metallic minerals sector production that are closely related to construction investments indicate that robust activity in the construction sector continues.
Moreover, the BTS indicators do not point to a significant deterioration in investment expenditure tendency over the next twelve-month period as of November, thereby supporting this view.
To sum up, although economic activity has shown a tendency to recover in the last quarter of 2006, overall demand conditions continue to support disinflation.
Despite the relatively strong course of external demand and increasing public expenditure, total demand slowed down compared to previous periods.
The annual growth rate of output is expected to be low in the last quarter of 2006, due to the high base in end 2005.
It is projected that the economic activity will continue to recover gradually in the upcoming period.
Unit labor costs in the private manufacturing sector continued to decline since productivity increases were higher than the rise in real wages.
This, in turn, continued to support the disinflation process in the third quarter of 2006.
A similar trend is expected in the last quarter of the year.
Recently available data indicate that the rate of decline in agricultural employment started to slow down significantly, while the employment in other sectors continued to rise.
However, the fact that the unemployment rate in non- agricultural sectors is still as high as 11.9 percent suggests that the rise in employment has not yet reached a level that would exert pressure on inflation.
On the other hand, the recent wage adjustments that are above the inflation target may hinder the disinflation process via its impact on expectations and production costs.
Inflation expectations continue to improve.
The distribution of inflation expectations that displayed a wide dispersion in June and July gained a more consolidated structure in recent months.
Agents still expect that the disinflation process will continue in the medium term.
Nevertheless, medium-term inflation expectations are still significantly above the targets.
The Committee assesses that under the current circumstances monetary policy stance in Turkey is non-accommodative.
The decline in inflation expectations has continued to tighten the monetary conditions in the last quarter of 2006.
In other words, although policy rates remained unchanged, the real rates have continued to increase.
Longer-term interest rates such as the interest rates on government securities and consumer loans stayed at higher levels.
We expect aggregate demand conditions to support the underlying disinflation process in the next couple of quarters.
However, there are some risks regarding the medium-term inflation outlook.
The main risk factor for the medium-term inflation outlook can be stated as higher-than-expected inflation inertia, as currently manifested in the inertia in medium-term inflation expectations and services inflation.
We expect that slowdown in the aggregate demand will induce a gradual decline in services inflation in the period ahead.
However, given the low relative productivity growth in the sevices sector, backward-looking price setting behavior, and the sensitivity of services prices to wage hikes, the developments in prices of services should continue to be closely monitored.
The recent wage hikes have highlighted these risks even more.
Given that we plan to bring inflation down from 10 percent to 4 percent in a fairly short period of time, the Committe judges that the possibility of a sustained persistence in high services inflation stands as a major risk for the medium-term outlook.
Realization of such a risk could require keeping the tight policy stance for an extended period.
Another risk for the inflation outlook is the uncertainty regarding the impact of the monetary policy on aggregate demand.
Lags in monetary policy transmission are time variant across countries, and the Turkish economy is no exception.
The sizeable slowdown in the third quarter of 2006 was a result of lower confidence due to financial market volatility in May-June period, rather than an outcome of the tightened monetary policy.
Although the tightening exercised since June 2006 started to be effective on private demand recently, the extent and the duration of the slowdown in overall economic activity remains to be seen.
There are also some uncertainties related to the behavior of government spending, which could represent an upside risk to aggregate demand, and therefore inflation in 2007.
In this respect, the MPC has been closely monitoring the macroeconomic impact of the developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expenditures.
Another risk factor that may delay attaining the medium-term targets is the possibility of a sudden change in the global financial market sentiment.
Global liquidity is still the major factor in shaping risk appetite and volatility in financial markets.
Currently, the concerns over high inflation and thus higher interest rates in the United States seem to have diminished.
However, a faster than envisaged slowdown in the world economy or disorderly developments owing to global imbalances still remain as possible scenarios that may lead to another wave of portfolio shock in emerging markets.
The Committee will revise the policy rates if these shocks turns out to have lasting effects on the medium-term inflation outlook.
There are favorable scenarios regarding the inflation outlook as well as unfavorable ones.
Turkey is a net commodity importer.
Although a slowdown in the global economic growth or a further easing in commodity prices could have an immediate adverse impact on domestic inflation through its impact on the global risk appetite, it will also lead to a positive terms of trade shock and thus to a more favorable outlook in the medium term.
In light of these developments, the Committee decided to keep the policy rates on hold.
The Committee has assessed that meeting the medium term inflation targets necessitates the maintenance of the cautious policy stance.
The gap between medium-term inflation expectations and the targets, the risks related to services price inflation, and the uncertainties in global economy necessitate keeping the tight policy stance.
The Committee closely monitors the lagged effects of the monetary tightening since June 2006.
Moreover, the potential impact of the progress in the structural reform agenda and developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully evaluated.
The Central Bank will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy in case of any new developments that would adversely affect the medium-term inflation outlook.
The continuation of the European Union accession process and the sustained implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program are still crucial.
Developments related to the structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium and long run are followed closely from the perspective of both macroeconomic stability and price stability.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in recent years will increase the resilience of the economy against possible changes in the global conjuncture.
In January, consumer prices increased by 1% and the annual inflation rate was 9.93% with a rise mainly driven by unprocessed food prices edging up sharply in response to both export- and supply-related factors, while other prices did not reveal a negative outlook.
Summary of the previous .
Committee (the Committee) meeting indicated that food prices continue to pose a risk on inflation and developments in January’s inflation proved this to be true.
Unprocessed food prices recorded a historically high increase by 8.82% in January with an annual price increase above 20% driven particularly by greenhouse food prices on which the effects of increasing export facilities were also felt.
Although in February a downward movement in the annual unprocessed food price inflation is likely, risks still remain a major concern.
The downward trend in the annual rate of increase of goods prices excluding unprocessed food and energy continued as the new Turkish Lira strengthened and domestic demand slowed down.
The annual inflation in this sub-group declined to 5.73%, reverting back to the figures in pre-May 2006 period.
Likewise, most of the alternative core inflation indicators recorded lower annual figures.
Especially the decline in the annual rate of increase in special CPI Aggregate-H (CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, liquor, tobacco and gold) has become more evident.
January inflation developments also pointed to the fact that the expected slowdown in services prices has not occurred yet.
The annual rate of increase in transportation services prices decelerated in line with the developments in oil prices, whereas elevating prices of rents and restaurants-hotels continued to keep services inflation at high levels.
Despite the rising food price inflation (under CPI), the annual inflation in agriculture prices (under PPI) continued to decline, which can be explained by the fact that most unprocessed foods pushing consumer prices up by sharp rises in January were, in the same month, not included in PPI.
In sum the rise in inflation in January did not change the medium term inflation outlook as it can be attributed to the developments in unprocessed food prices.
The moderation of energy and other commodity prices along with the disappearance of the base effect of exchange rate pass-through may lead to a substantial decline in the annual inflation rate, starting from the second quarter of 2007.
Annual inflation may exhibit a downward movement in February owing to a possible correction in unprocessed food prices and may display an upward movement in March in response to possible administered price hikes.
Yet, the disinflation trend will become more discernible starting from the second quarter.
The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report: 8.
The slowdown in private consumer demand continues.
Consumer credits, following a rapid expansion until mid 2006, slowed down significantly and, notwithstanding a temporary rise in December, resumed its slow growth trend in January.
The same course of movement applied to monetary indicators.
Despite a slight recovery in the demand for durable goods during the last quarter of 2006, seasonally adjusted monthly automobile sales fell in January, while sales of white goods did not display a noticeable change.
Consumer Confidence Index (compiled jointly by Central Bank and TURKSTAT), and the CNBC-e Consumer Confidence Index did not show any significant changes, in January in seasonally adjusted terms.
Foreign demand remains relatively strong.
In the course of the fourth quarter of 2006, the annual rate of increase of real exports prevailed over that of real imports.
In this respect, net export demand is expected to continue its positive contribution to the GDP growth in the last quarter of 2006 as well.
Besides, the ongoing high rate of export growth in January and February, as suggested by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly figures, indicates that foreign demand will continue to have a positive impact on growth.
Industrial production, consistent with the outlook introduced in the Inflation Report, displayed a slight recovery during the last quarter of 2006.
Seasonally adjusted industrial production decreased in December.
This development, however, is regarded as temporary when other economic indicators are also taken into account.
Business Tendency Survey (BTS) indicators such as the amount of new orders received from domestic and international markets and the volume of sold items for the next three months, and the expected growth of production volume for the next three months do not point to any contraction in economic activity.
Machinery-and-equipment investments displayed a partial recovery in the fourth quarter of 2006 compared to the third quarter, which, however, remained subdued considering the previous years.
Production and imports in December and sales of commercial vehicles in January did not point to a significant recovery in machinery-and-equipment investments.
However, the increase in investment spending tendency- another BTS indicator - in December signals a positive outlook for medium-term investments.
On the other hand, the ongoing rise in the non-metallic minerals production in December indicated that the robust activity in construction sector continues.
To sum up, the Committee judges that aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation.
Economic activity is projected to recover gradually in the upcoming period, while growth figures might be relatively low in the second quarter of 2007, largely driven by base effects.
In addition, the Committee members noted that the business days between October and January were quite variable – due to shifting holidays - compared to the same period of the previous year, which needs to be taken into account when making a solid assessment for economic activity.
In this context, economic data of the upcoming period will be closely monitored.
Recent developments indicate that productivity has continued to increase in manufacturing industry in the fourth quarter of 2006.
Moreover, the high non- farm unemployment rate is expected to contain the upward pressures in unit labor costs.
However, with inflation evidently above mid-term targets, developments in public incomes policy still play a crucial role in the disinflation process.
Besides the contributions of aggregate demand and cost factors to the disinflation process, the partial improvement in mid-term inflation expectations was maintained.
Although January inflation developments led to a slight rise in the end-year inflation expectations, medium-term expectations continued to improve as of the first half of January.
Recently, albeit the unchanged CBT policy interest rates, the returns on government securities displayed a significant decline, particularly on the back of the change in risk perception and favorable international liquidity conditions.
The decline in the interest rates of bank loans, on the other hand, remained limited.
The current high level of the bank loan rates continue to restrain credit demand.
However, bank loans - especially the consumer credits - may re-boost in case the downward trend of credit interest rates gains momentum.
Inflation is expected to maintain its downward course in the upcoming period, converging to the targets in the medium run.
Yet, several risks remain.
The main risk to the mid-term inflation outlook is the possibility of higher-than- expected downward persistence in inflation, manifested lately by the inertia in inflation expectations and services inflation.
Although inflation expectations after worsening during the post-financial turbulence period in mid-2006 have recently gained a positive outlook, medium-term expectations are still above the targets.
Rigidity in services inflation continued in January.
The slowdown in the overall economic activity is expected to contain the services inflation after a while.
However, given the backward-looking price setting behavior, the sensitivity of services prices to wage hikes and structural factors, the possibility of sustained high services inflation remains as a risk.
Materialization of such a risk would require maintaining the tight policy stance.
Another risk to the inflation outlook is the uncertainty concerning the lagged effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand.
The impact of monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 on private demand has been noticeable recently.
However, the size of economic slowdown and its effect on inflation still remain uncertain.
Moreover, the ongoing uncertainties related to government spending constitute an upside risk to aggregate demand and inflation.
Waning risk appetite or a possible fluctuation in liquidity conditions in global markets continue to pose a risk against the inflation outlook.
Recently, the perception on the US economy that risks between inflation and growth will remain on balance helped alleviate the uncertainties in question.
On the other hand, a higher-than-expected growth rate in Japan suggested further monetary tightening.
Consequently, uncertainties related to global liquidity conditions, notwithstanding a periodical fallback, continued to exist.
The Committee will react appropriately by revising the policy rates in case sudden changes in global liquidity conditions pose permanent challenges to inflation outlook.
Developments related to international commodity prices have recently contributed to the inflation outlook.
Metal prices continue to decline.
Both the balanced growth of global economy and the current level of oil stock foster the expectation that crude oil prices will not display sharp rises in the upcoming period.
However, it should be noted that projections for commodity prices involve substantial uncertainty and therefore they need to be assessed as a risk factor under current circumstances.
The Committee has assessed that meeting the medium term inflation targets requires the maintenance of the cautious policy stance.
The gap between medium-term inflation expectations and targets, the risks to services prices inflation and the uncertainties in global economy necessitate keeping a tight policy stance.
The continuation of the European Union accession process and the sustained implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program remain of critical concern.
Developments in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium and long run are closely followed both in terms of macroeconomic stability and price stability.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in recent years will strengthen the resilience of the economy against possible changes in the global conjuncture.
In February, consumer prices increased by 0.43% and the annual inflation rate rose up to 10.16% The rise in annual inflation can be mainly attributed to (i) tax- driven hikes in cigarette prices, (ii) early winter discounts in clothing, (iii) rise in processed food prices and (iv) the base effect of durable goods discounts of the same period last year.
These developments led to an increase in the annual inflation of Special CPI aggregates, also suspending the downward trend of the annual rate of increase of the H index (CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold).
But, the annual inflation measured by the H Index is expected to resume its downward movement starting from the second quarter of the year.
After rising sharply in January, the annual inflation rate of unprocessed food prices exhibited a partial correction in February.
Yet, the inflation in unprocessed food prices still remains very high.
Energy prices, on the other hand, retraced their earlier run-up by March, after a slowdown in January and February, along with the recent upward movement in oil prices.
As regards the services group, the annual inflation of rents, hotels-restaurants and transportation services declined at a subdued level while the overall services inflation remained relatively unchanged as annual inflation in other sub-items of the services group continued to rise.
Committee (the Committee) noted the possible effects of administered price hikes on March inflation, which was highlighted at the previous meeting.
The Committee foresees that the annual inflation might thus temporarily rise in March but will start to decline gradually by the second quarter.
The Committee evaluates the recent data as broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report: 6.
Seasonally adjusted automobile sales fell in January and February, while sales of white goods did not change since the last quarter of 2006.
In addition, the consumer confidence indices do not suggest a noticeable change in semi- and non-durable goods demand for the first quarter of 2007.
The leading indicators on private consumption demand also point that the seasonally adjusted private consumption will not reveal a significant change in the first quarter of 2007 compared to the last quarter of 2006.
Credit growth continued to slow down and so did the growth rate of other monetary indicators.
Although bank lending rates declined gradually since late January, the current financing conditions, together with the tight liquidity conditions and the surging global volatility, continue to restrain credit expansion.
Investment demand and imports of capital goods did not change significantly compared to the last quarter of 2006, whereas the sales of commercial vehicles fell in January and February.
On the other hand, the data on non-metallic minerals production and imports point to an ongoing robust activity in construction.
Exports keep growing as the productivity in the manufacturing industry continues to rise and the European economy preserves its robust economic activity, while imports are restrained by the slowdown in growth rate.
Accordingly, January’s trade volume indexes indicate that the growth rate in exports prevailed over imports.
The ongoing high rate of export growth in February and March, as revealed by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly figures, suggests that the foreign demand continues to have a positive contribution on the growth rate.
Despite the ongoing decline in domestic demand, industrial production keeps its strength on the back of foreign demand, with an upswing in January mainly driven by base effects and the number of business days.
Yet, controlling for these factors does not change the fact that industrial production still displays a significant rise.
Moreover, capacity utilization rates and expectations of February suggest that the production will continue to rise.
Although economic activity is projected to recover gradually in the second half of the year, annual growth rate in GDP will be low in the second quarter owing mainly to base effects.
Recent data indicate that services employment growth continued to moderate since mid-2006, which supports the slowdown in economic activity.
On the other hand, the co-existence of a remarkable slowdown in industrial employment with strong industrial production in 2007 suggests that labor productivity continues to rise.
Developments in other cost factors do not display a negative outlook in general.
As the growth rate of the world economy becomes more balanced, the crude oil prices display a more stable course.
However, it is not possible to make accurate projections regarding the oil prices in the medium to long-term.
Moreover, the recent fluctuations in metal prices confirm that risks related to the commodity prices, as a whole, should not be disregarded.
Although the end-year inflation expectations displayed a slight upward movement in March, medium-term inflation expectations remained unchanged, yet significantly above the target.
As inflation starts declining in the upcoming period, the expectations will gradually converge to the target.
While taking monetary policy decisions, the Committee focuses on whether the medium-term inflation outlook is consistent with the target.
In other words, what matters for the conduct of monetary policy is the evolution of inflation in the medium run, rather than short-term temporary fluctuations.
In this respect, a one-off rise in March inflation, led by administered prices, will not be crucial in the decision-making process, as it does not alter the medium-term inflation outlook.
CBT has not changed its policy rates since August 2006.
The reduction in the risk premium and the improvement in inflation expectations have further tightened the policy stance since then.
The cautious stance of monetary policy contained inflation expectations and thus the long-term interest rates.
The fluctuations in international financial markets in early March induced the interest rates of government securities to rise.
Yet, the interest rates came down soon, as the volatility was short-lived.
The downward movement of bank lending rates since January moderated thereafter.
In sum, a joint evaluation of the current policy stance and other factors affecting inflation suggests that inflation will maintain a downward course in the upcoming period, converging to the targets in the medium run.
The current level of inflation expectations poses a risk to wage and price setting behavior and, thus, to the disinflation process.
Moreover, services prices-related risks still prevail.
Given the relatively low productivity in the services sector, the backward-looking price setting behavior and the sensitivity of services prices to wage hikes, relatively high services inflation should not fall as a surprise.
However, even if these factors are taken into account, the services inflation still needs to fall below its current level in order to reach the medium term targets.
The Committee, in this regard, continues to closely monitor services price developments.
The uncertainty concerning the lagged effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand still remains a risk to the inflation outlook.
Although the impact of monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 on private demand has become noticeable recently, the cumulative impact is still to be seen.
And the recent increase in government spending adds to this uncertainty.
In this respect, the Committee closely monitors the indicators related to the overall economic activity.
The Committe has frequently emphasized the fact that waning risk appetite or a possible fluctuation in liquidity conditions in global markets continue to pose a risk against the inflation outlook.
Indeed, the economic data announced in the United States, Japan and China delivered another bout of volatility in international markets in early March.
Although these fluctuations were short lived and temporary, and did not deteriorate the inflation outlook, they indicate that uncertainties related to global liquidity conditions may continue in the period ahead.
The Committee will not allow these possible fluctuations to have adverse effects on the medium-term inflation outlook.
In light of these developments, the Committee has assessed that meeting the medium-term inflation targets requires the maintenance of a cautious policy stance and decided to keep the policy rates on hold.
The uncertainties in global economy, the gap between inflation expectations and targets and the risks to services prices inflation necessitate keeping a tight policy stance.
Should any adverse developments affecting the medium-term inflation outlook presented in the January Inflation Report arise, the Central Bank will not hesitate to further tighten the monetary policy stance.
Developments in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline in the medium and long run are closely monitored both in terms of macroeconomic stability and price stability.
In March, consumer prices increased by 0.92% and the annual inflation rate rose up to 10.86%.
The relatively high cumulative inflation in the first quarter can be mainly attributed to soaring fruit and vegetable prices and tax-driven price hikes in tobacco products.
Surging tobacco prices pushed total consumer inflation up by 0.5 percentage points.
The moderation in annual inflation of unprocessed food prices in March was basically driven by descending prices of items other than fruits and vegetables.
The 11.74% rise in unprocessed food prices in the first quarter, due to an increase in fruit and vegetable prices above seasonal norms, highlights that the risks related to price developments in this group are still notable.
The increase in the prices of petroleum products accelerated in March parallel to the developments in the global oil market, but the annual inflation in the energy component of the housing subgroup eased.
The first quarter rise in the overall energy index remained more modest compared to the previous year.
Annual goods inflation ascended in the first quarter, mainly due to the base effect resulting from the decline in prices of particularly durable goods associated with the appreciation of TRY in the first quarter of 2006.
Moreover, first-quarter discounts in clothing remained below year-ago levels and added to the annual goods inflation.
These developments altogether led to an increase in the annual inflation of Special CPI aggregates.
The annual rate of increase in the prices of several services sub-items has been displaying a limited slowdown, yet there has been no significant improvement in the overall pricing behavior.
However, the slowdown in domestic demand is expected to have lagged effects on services prices.
In addition, a notable base effect stemming from last year’s market turbulence and the adverse supply shocks such as the hikes in energy and unprocessed food prices is expected to ease annual inflation in the coming months.
Accordingly, the disinflation trend is expected to become discernible starting from the second quarter of 2007. .
Committee (The Committee) identifies the recent data on economic activity as broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report: 7.
The sustained decline in automobile and white goods sales in the first quarter signifies that the slowdown in demand for durable goods continues to curb private consumption.
The data on consumer credits, another indicator of consumption expenditures, also suggest a similar outlook.
Motor vehicle loans continue to decrease, while other sub-items of consumer credits do not reveal a notable increase compared to the second half of 2006.
These developments coupled with the high base of the first half of 2006 reveal that annual growth in private consumption expenditures will not display a significant change in the first half of 2007.
The negative impact of the slowdown in domestic demand on economic growth is largely compensated by the robust foreign demand.
In the first two months of 2007 exports increased more than imports in real terms.
Leading indicators on March and April figures suggest that the strong export performance continues.
Investment expenditures did not change notably over the last quarter of 2006.
In January and February, seasonally adjusted capital goods imports rose over the fourth quarter of 2006, whereas commercial vehicle sales dropped, driven by light commercial vehicles.
Manufacturing of electrical machinery and electronics maintains its quarter-ago levels.
On the other hand, data on construction permits suggest that the construction sector continues to grow at a rapid pace.
Although In January and February the industrial production index displayed high annual growth rates, this development mainly owes to the base effect.
Seasonally adjusted data do not refer to any acceleration in industrial production.
The ongoing favorable export performance supports industrial production, but the slowdown in domestic demand constrains it.
The fact that exports remained robust in March indicates that industrial production maintained its upward trend in March, albeit at a slower pace than in January and February.
Between April and June, industrial production may temporarily display low annual growth rates led by base effects.
In sum, strong foreign demand is expected to support growth in the first half of the year, but the slowdown in domestic demand will continue to restrain the aggregate demand.
In this respect, aggregate demand conditions will support disinflation.
Recent data indicate that employment in services maintained a modest growth rate since July 2006.
This trend is in line with the slowdown in economic activity.
Moreover, export-led industrial production remained relatively strong while industrial employment displayed a slowdown over the last quarter of 2006, suggesting that labor productivity continued to rise.
The recent surge in crude oil prices is worth noting and the concurrent rise in other commodity prices increases the risks related to cost-push shocks.
The elevated levels of the oil and other commodity prices require close monitoring.
In the recent period, end-2007 inflation expectations displayed a slight increase possibly owing to the high inflation outturns in the first quarter.
Yet, the medium-term inflation expectations have not deteriorated, pointing that the agents perceived the rise in inflation temporary.
However, the Committee considers the gap between medium-term inflation expectations and the targets as a risk to price setting behavior.
Private consumption demand continued to slow down in the first quarter.
This development suggests that the transmission mechanism of monetary policy began to function significantly.
Yet, the increased caution in spending behavior of economic agents, due to heightened risk perceptions, added to the slowdown in private consumer demand.
Recently, increasing domestic market liquidity coupled with improved external borrowing conditions has eased credit supply conditions.
The declining need to keep high rollover ratios in Treasury’s debt servicing, and CBT’s FX buying auctions contribute to the rise in the market liquidity.
Another factor to help enhance banks’ borrowing facilities is the favorable course of TRY-denominated bonds issued by foreign institutions.
In addition, non-residents continue to raise their holdings in Turkey.
A joint evaluation of all these developments reveals that banks’ loanable funds are on a rise.
Despite the improvement in credit supply conditions, the high level of bank loan rates, backed by CBT’s cautious stance, continues to restrain credit demand.
Although the interest rates on loans have recently fallen, they still remain very high compared to the first quarter of 2006.
Therefore, unless interest rates fall down to lower levels, the growth rate in consumer credits will remain contained in the short term.
The Committee reviewed the inflation projections to appear in the April Inflation Report and concluded that there had been some developments that would necessitate an update in the inflation outlook presented in January Inflation Report.
These developments can be listed as follows: 19.
Firstly, considering the revisions in the 2006 GDP figures, the lagged contribution of demand conditions to disinflation is now assumed to be slightly less than the level set out in the January Inflation Report.
Secondly, the Committee observed that unprocessed food prices still lack the expected correction and that tobacco products suffered tax-driven price hike.
Furthermore, the decrease in annual services inflation is deemed to be less-than-expected, although some sub-items displayed improvements.
Lastly, oil-price assumption is revised upward with regard to the surges in oil prices.
Consequently, inflation forecasts are revised up.
The above-summarized updates indicate that further caution might be required compared to the January Inflation Report of 2007, to make sure that the medium- term outlook is consistent with the targets.
Therefore, the Committee decided to enhance the cautious policy stance, as stated in April Inflation Report, against the risks such as the gap between inflation expectations and targets, the backward looking pricing behavior, increase in oil prices, prevailing uncertainties, and the stickiness related to services price inflation.
The potential impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda and the developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully evaluated.
Within this framework, the Committee assessed that meeting the medium term inflation targets requires the maintenance of the tight policy stance.
A joint evaluation of the current policy stance and other factors affecting inflation suggests that the disinflation trend will become more discernible starting from the second quarter of the year.
However, risks remain to inflation outlook: 23.
The monetary tightening since June 2006 is affecting the domestic demand as expected.
The lagged effects on inflation are yet to be seen.
Recent data is broadly consistent with the main outlook presented througout the Inflation Reports since July 2006.
The impact of monetary tightening in the second half of 2006 on the demand is visible especially through the slowdown in the expenditures of durable goods and machinery-equipment.
Robust performance of exports has been offsetting the contractionary impact of the slowdown in private domestic demand and contributing positively to the economic growth rate.
Nevertheless, uncertainties over the monetary transmission mechanism prevail to be a risk for medium-term inflation outlook.
While the recent hikes in public expenditures seem to further blur the outlook, the proposed cut-down in certain non-interest public expenditure items have somewhat relieved these concerns.
In sum, a lower-than- expected impact of slowdown in domestic demand on inflation still remains as a risk factor.
Should such a risk materalize, the CBT may further tighten the policy stance.
Another risk related to the medium-term inflation outlook is the stickiness in inflation expectations and backward looking price setting which would lead to a higher-than-expected inertia in the disinflation process.
The improvement in inflation expectations came to a halt in the last three months.
Although the expectations should come down gradually as the headline inflation eases, the sticky medium-term inflation expectations remain to be a risk for the inflation outlook through its possible reflections on the price and wage setting behavior.
The CBT will keep its cautious stance for an extended period should such risk materialize.
Possible fluctuations in global markets remain as a risk to the inflation outlook.
The prevailing uncertainties on the US economy and on global imbalances still have the potential to trigger fluctuations in international markets which may have adverse impact on emerging economies.
Moreover, the elevated levels of the oil prices do not help to ease the risks related to global financial markets.
On the other hand, the Treasury’s strong cash accounts and the recent slowdown in the deterioration of the current account have the potential to mitigate the impact of possible fluctuations in the financial markets.
In what so ever, should a shock lead to heigthened perception of uncertainty, the CBT will retain the medium-term perspective and announce the appropriate strategy to bring inflation back to the target.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient for achieving long-run price stability.
The role of fiscal policy and structural reforms are also critical in this process.
The European Union accession process and the sustained implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program also remain to be of concern.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in recent years will strengthen the resilience of the economy against possible changes in the global economy.
Consumer prices increased by 1.21% in April, bringing annual inflation down to 10.72%.
Yet, the surge in clothing prices restrained the decline in inflation despite the considerable slowdown in inflation of consumer durables and services.
The rise in the annual inflation of clothing and footwear can be attributed to the recent cost-driven hikes in apparel manufacturing prices.
Recent course in clothing and footwear prices suggest that the price developments in this group will contribute less to the disinflation process in 2007 compared to 2005 and 2006.
On the other hand, the prices of durable goods exhibited a favorable outlook in April, possibly owing to the strength of Turkish lira as well as the slowdown in domestic demand.
Recent price developments suggest that services inflation has been easing, albeit modestly.
Annual services inflation dropped to its lowest level since September 2006.
Monthly hikes in services prices from January to April fell behind the year-ago levels of the same period.
Along with the slowdown in domestic demand, services inflation is expected to decline further gradually in the upcoming period, yet, the .
Committee (the Committee) considers that this improvement may be limited given the backward-looking pricing behavior, the high-sensitivity of service prices to wage hikes and the relatively low productivity in this sector.
Monthly inflation in the housing utilities continued to ease in April.
On the other hand, prices of petroleum products re-accelerated by a 6.13% rise in the last two months, slowing down the decline in headline inflation.
Although clothing prices displayed a sharp rise in April, the favorable developments in prices of durable goods and services pulled the annual inflation of all special CPI aggregates down.
With the disappearance of the exchange rate pass-through effect of May and June 2006, the downward trend in the annual rate of increase of H index will be further noticed in the upcoming period.
Unprocessed food prices continued to rise dramatically, at a rate of 16.63% per annum.
Fruit prices soared by 42.52% in the first four months of 2007, up from an average 3% monthly rise for the same period in 2005 and 2006.
Due to warm weather conditions beyond seasonal norms, the declines in fresh vegetable and fruit prices, which normally take place in the summer season, may shift from June to May.
Moreover, exchange rate movements and the subsequent pass- through in May 2006 constitute a high base on the consumer price index.
In this regard, the Committee noted that a partial correction in unprocessed food prices, and the base effect may contribute to the decline in annual inflation in May.
In light of these developments, the Committee assessed that the awaited signs of disinflation have emerged in April and that the disinflation trend will be more significant in the upcoming period.
The Committee identifies the recent data on economic activity as broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
Consumer credits exhibit a pattern as outlined in the inflation report.
Automobile loans continue to decrease in real terms.
Housing loans are on a rise, albeit at a modest pace.
Personal expenditure loans, on the other hand, continue to increase at a relatively higher rate but do not reveal a notable acceleration.
Despite a limited fall observed recently, bank loan rates are still above the previous year’s levels and continue to curb credit expansion.
Leading indicators suggest that the slowdown in domestic demand continues.
Sales of automobiles and white goods fell in the first quarter of 2007 in seasonally adjusted terms.
Falling domestic automobile sales in April signify that the private demand may continue to slowdown in the second quarter.
The Committee judges that tightened financing conditions and growing uncertainties will continue to suspend the durable goods demand.
Foreign demand remains robust.
The strong export performance compensates the negative impact of the slowdown in domestic demand on overall economic activity.
Exports in the first quarter prevailed over imports in real terms.
Leading indicators of April and May suggest that the strong export performance continues.
The robust external demand supports industrial production.
As suggested by seasonally adjusted data, industrial production displayed a flat course in the first quarter.
Despite the ongoing stability in industrial production, the fact that last year’s production was highly volatile may lead to fluctuations in annual growth rates.
Indeed, industrial production rose sharply by around 7.8% in the first quarter of 2007 owing to the base effect of last year’s first quarter; however, in the upcoming months, it may display low annual growth rates due to high base in the second quarter of 2006.
Imports of capital goods rose in the first quarter, whereas machinery- equipment investments were restrained by the low course of light commercial vehicle sales.
April figures suggest that the slowdown in commercial vehicle sales continues.
Production and import data on non-metallic minerals, on the other hand, do not refer to any significant slowdown in construction activities.
In sum, the recent data confirm the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
Aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation.
Demand for durable goods and machinery-equipment investment continue to ease, while strong external demand moderates the slowdown in overall economic activity.
The growth rate in services employment decelerated in the last three quarters.
Moreover, industrial production remained relatively strong while industrial employment displayed a slowdown, suggesting that labor productivity continued to rise.
The recently elevated prices of crude oil and commodities add to the inflationary pressures via imported input costs and thus curb the disinflation process.
These price movements are closely monitored.
Market expectations for end-year inflation increased slightly in April, possibly due to higher-than–expected inflation outturns.
However, the medium-term inflation expectations have not deteriorated.
Inflation expectations for the next 12 months have been improving modestly since early 2007, while those for the next 24 months stayed flat at around 5.5% in general.
Medium-term expectations should move downward as the disinflation process accelerates in the upcoming period.
Global bond issues of foreign financial institutions in YTL and the robust privatization revenues have been increasing the supply of loanable funds.
These developments exert a downward pressure on bank lending rates.
However, the tight stance of monetary policy and the ongoing perceptions of uncertainty continue to restrain the demand for credit.
Accordingly, consumer credits are expected to maintain their modest course in the upcoming period.
Other monetary indicators also display a similar outlook.
Specifically, the gradual slowdown in the annual growth of banknotes in circulation since the second half of 2006 is noteworthy.
However, the information included in monetary indicators should be handled with caution due to possible shifts in money demand arising from changes in portfolio preferences or financial system deepening.
The ongoing slowdown in private consumption and investment demand reveal that the monetary tightening since June 2006 is affecting the domestic demand as expected.
Against this background, disinflation is expected to become more significant in the upcoming period.
However, there are some remaining risks to the inflation outlook: 21.
Possibility of stronger-than-expected inertia in inflation poses a significant risk for the medium-term inflation outlook.
Currently, medium-term inflation expectations are not aligned with the targets.
Although, the Committee expects the decline in inflation to deliver an improvement in inflation expectations in the period ahead, the current course of expectations continues to pose a significant risk to the inflation outlook through wage and price setting behavior.
Uncertainties over the lagged effects of monetary policy stand as a major risk to inflation outlook.
Although the rate of increase in durable goods and services prices decelerated in the recent period, these developments do not provide enough evidence to claim that the current inflation trend is in line with medium-term targets.
In addition, the course of non-interest budget expenditures exacerbates the uncertainty over the lagged effects of monetary policy.
Recently, the developments on international liquidity conditions and global risk appetite have been in favor of developing countries.
However, ongoing uncertainties concerning global economy and volatile commodity prices pose risk to inflation.
Should any such shock threaten the medium-term inflation outlook, the Central Bank will react depending on the source of the shock.
The Central Bank does not respond to temporary fluctuations in inflation.
Committee are based on an overall evaluation of all factors affecting medium-term inflation, rather than temporary fluctuations in inflation.
In other words, the Central Bank decisions are focused on achieving consistency between medium-term inflation and the targets.
In this regard, although disinflation is expected to become more significant in the upcoming period, the Committee, with a medium term perspective, decided to keep the policy rates unchanged against the risks such as the gap between inflation expectations and targets, the backward looking pricing behavior, elevated oil prices, prevailing uncertainties, and the stickiness related to services price inflation.
Moreover, the potential impacts of the progress in the structural reform agenda and the developments in incomes policy as well as public sector non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations are carefully evaluated.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient for achieving price stability.
Developments in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are closely monitored both in terms of macroeconomic stability and price stability.
Consumer prices rose by 0.50% in May.
Annual inflation fell to 9.23% by 1.5 percentage points, mainly owing to the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the partial correction in unprocessed food prices and the base effect.
Annual inflation of unprocessed food prices declined to 11.09%.
This downfall was, as noted by the .
Committee (MPC) last month, due to warmer weather conditions resulting in the early marketing of certain summer crops.
This development mainly drove down the vegetable prices, whereas fruit prices continued to rise dramatically.
The considerable decline in vegetable prices in May had a favorable impact on May inflation but brought along the possibility that price declines may remain more limited during the summer months.
Rising support prices for grains, possible drops in crop yields of certain products caused by unusually warm weather conditions and low rainfall, and the new Wholesale Market Regulation on fresh fruit-vegetable trade are among other factors posing uncertainties over food prices.
On the other hand, recent Value Added Tax cuts in a number of food items may have a slightly favorable effect on food prices in June.
The recent downfall in services inflation became quite discernible in May.
Annual services inflation fell by 0.91 percentage points to 10.85% down from April.
Cumulative rise in services prices for the first five months is 3.39%–the lowest figure since the 2003 based CPI index was introduced.
Especially inflation in transportation services and restaurants-hotels indicate a notable improvement compared to the previous years.
Prices of most items under services tend to decelerate owing to the monetary tightening, yet rents maintain an elevated course.
Energy prices are much affected by soaring global oil prices.
Fuel prices rose by 8.45% within the last three months.
Utility prices, on the other hand, display a benign outlook with quite moderate rises.
The Committee, however, carefully evaluates the possible impact of oil prices on utilities.
The Committee predicts that inflation will further slow down in the coming months.
The fading out of the exchange rate pass-through effect driven by last year’s volatility, and the lagged effects of monetary tightening especially on prices of services and durable goods are expected to add to the decline in annual inflation.
Special CPI aggregates also suggest a similar outlook.
The Committee assesses that recent data on economic activity is broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
The slowdown in private demand becomes more pronounced.
Available data suggest that domestic demand continued to moderate in the second quarter.
Housing and personal expenditure loans expanded at a modest pace in annual terms, whereas the demand for automobile loans continued to decline.
Seasonally adjusted white good sales and imports of consumer goods fell in April and the automobile sales plunged in April and Mayindicating an ongoing retrenchment in consumer demand.
Private investment demand for machinery and equipment continues to slow down.
While the seasonally adjusted data for the electrical machinery and electronics production and capital goods imports in April are higher than the March figures, the reduced machinery-equipment production and the continued decline in commercial vehicle sales indicate that investment growth remains at a subdued level.
Production and import data on non-metallic minerals, on the other hand, signal a modest growth in construction.
External demand remains strong.
Exports continued to grow more than imports in real terms in April.
The leading indicators reveal a similar pattern for May and June.
These developments suggest that net external demand has continued to support growth during the first half of 2007.
Weakening course in domestic demand led to a slowdown in industrial production, despite robust external demand.
April industrial production figure was lower than that of March in seasonally adjusted terms.
Also considering the strong second-quarter figures of the last year, annual growth in industrial production is expected to decelerate significantly in the second quarter of 2007.
Moreover, the moderating growth in services employment in the last three quarters is in line with the slowdown in economic activity.
The marked decline in annual inflation in May had a favorable impact on inflation expectations.
Accordingly, short and medium term expectations displayed a slight improvement.
However, ongoing perceptions of uncertainty limit the downward trend in inflation expectations.
The improvement in medium-term expectations should continue as the headline inflation keeps decelerating towards the 4 per cent target in the upcoming period.
In sum, economic developments over the last 12 months are highly consistent with the Committee’s predictions.
Demand for consumption and investment continue to ease, while strong external demand moderates the slowdown in overall economic activity.
Aggregate demand conditions increasingly support disinflation.
Against this background, inflation is expected to maintain its downward course.
Parallel to the favorable outlook in medium-term inflation expectations, interest rates on government securities continue to decline.
The fall in interest rates and the ongoing capital inflows expand the supply of loanable funds and add to the downward pressure on bank lending rates, as recently observed in housing loan rates.
However, considering the cautious stance of monetary policy, the downward trend in lending rates is expected to be limited in the short term.
Current levels of the bank lending rates are still high enough to curb expenditures.
Moreover, the rise in risk perceptions and the resulting precautionary savings further limit the demand for credit.
Monetary indicators also confirm the tight stance of monetary policy and the slowdown in economic activity.
Real volume of currency in circulation that displayed a slowdown since mid-2006 declined in annual terms in 2007.
Nevertheless, changes in portfolio preferences and innovations in the financial system should also be taken into account while evaluating the monetary indicators.
The lagged effects of monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 are quite noticeable.
Against this background, inflation is expected to maintain its downward trend.
However, there are some remaining risks to the inflation outlook.
Inertia in inflation expectations and the backward looking pricing behavior poses a significant risk for the inflation outlook.
The elevated course of medium- term inflation expectations continue to stand as a risk factor, particularly through its potential impact on the wage and price setting behavior.
The Committee perceives the recent decline in services inflation as a favorable development, but also notes the risk that services inflation may remain high for a prolonged period.
In order to eliminate the gap between medium-term expectations and targets, the prudent monetary policy needs to be reinforced by sustained fiscal discipline.
Although the monetary tightening exercised since June 2006 is affecting domestic demand as expected, uncertainties over the lagged effects of monetary policy on inflation still remain.
Moreover, rising non-interest government expenditures has the potential to limit the effectiveness of monetary tightening.
Non-interest budget expenditures of the central government during the first five months of 2007 surpassed the already generous budgetary projectionsa development that requires close monitoring.
In this respect, the Committee carefully evaluates the potential impacts of the developments in incomes policy and public sector non-interest expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations.
Recent developments suggest that international liquidity conditions and global risk appetite remain to be risks against the inflation outlook.
Currently, the uncertainty related to main economic indicators in developed economies is perceived as a risk factor.
As a matter of fact, recently, stronger-than-expected data on the US economic activity has deferred rate cut expectations, which in turn led to fluctuations in the global financial markets.
Moreover, ongoing uncertainties over the global imbalances stand out as another risk factor that might lead to abrupt changes in global risk appetite and liquidity conditions.
The elevated crude oil prices continue to exert inflationary pressures and slow down the pace of disinflation.
The Committee judges that the risks against energy prices continue to be of concern, and closely monitors the movements in crude oil prices with regard to the inflation outlook.
To sum up, the Committee decided to keep the policy rates unchanged against the risks such as the gap between inflation expectations and targets, the backward looking pricing behavior, the remaining uncertaintiesnotwithstanding recent favorable developmentsover services price inflation, rising oil prices, and prevailing uncertainties.
The Committee assesses that meeting the medium term inflation targets requires the maintenance of the tight policy stance.
Developments in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are closely monitored in terms of both macroeconomic and price stability.
The European Union accession process and the implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program also remain to be of concern.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in recent years will strengthen the resilience of the economy against sudden changes in global sentiment.
Consumer prices fell by 0.24% in June, bringing 12-month cumulative inflation down by 0.63 percentage points to 8.60%.
Accordingly, annual inflation registered a total decline of 2.26 percentage points in the past 3 months and stayed within the uncertainty band.
Unprocessed food prices remain volatile.
Last month’s Summary of the .
Committee Meeting mentioned the possibility of more limited price declines of unprocessed food this summer due to early harvest of some vegetable items.
Indeed, the decline in vegetable prices in June was less than last year’s levels and thus the annual inflation of unprocessed food prices increased, notwithstanding the partial correction in fruit prices.
Volatility in fruit and vegetable prices continue to pose risks to the course of headline inflation.
Moreover, bad crop of wheat may have adverse effects on consumer prices through bread and grain products.
The rise in oil prices had adverse effects on inflation via fuel prices in the past couple of months.
Utility prices and non-oil energy items however, continued to display a benign course.
gold) inflation fell to 0.32%, per annum, in response to both the strong Turkish lira and the easing demand.
On the other hand, the annual inflation in clothing and footwear prices rose to 7.15%.
Although the services inflation ceased to decline in June, developments in sub-items suggest a continued downward trend: The main driver of services inflation in June was the rise in mobile phone call rates.
The delayed effects of rising oil prices on transportation services also somewhat restrained the decline in services inflation.
On the other hand, monthly inflation in other services items remained below last year’s levels.
In fact, the cumulative rise in service prices was only 4.61% in the first half of the year, the lowest 6-month figure since the 2003-based CPI index was introduced.
Annual services inflation is expected to further decline in the forthcoming period.
Special CPI aggregates also respond to last year’s monetary tightening.
The favorable course of services and durable goods prices in the last three months significantly curbed the inflation in special CPI aggregates.
Inflation is expected to come further down in the next couple of months, on the back of the lagged effects of monetary tightening and the high base of the second half of 2006. .
Committee (the Committee) assesses that the recent data on economic activity is broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
Although the GDP grew by 6.8% in annual terms during the first quarter of 2007, seasonally adjusted growth was only 0.4%, indicating an ongoing slowdown in economic activity.
Contribution of domestic demand to GDP growth was limited during the first quarter of 2007.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that private consumption and private investment expenditures displayed a moderate increase over the previous quarter, while construction investment continued to grow steadily.
Consumption spending continued to moderate in the second quarter.
The pace of growth in total consumer loans was low during the second quarter compared to the first half of 2006, although personal expenditure loans gained momentum in this period.
While automobile loans continued to decrease in the second quarter, other leading indicators on domestic demand such as domestic sales of white goods and imports of consumer goods declined slightly on seasonally adjusted terms during April-May period.
Taking into account the significant base effect driven by the strong demand of the last year, the annual growth in private consumption demand is expected to turn to negative in the second quarter.
Indicators of investment demand point to a modest recovery.
While imports of capital goods displayed a recovery during April-May, the decline in commercial vehicle sales continued to restrain machinery and equipment investment.
Construction investment, on the other hand, keep growing, albeit at a moderate pace compared to the previous two years.
In the first quarter, annual real growth rate in total government spending was 9.1%, moderating the slowdown in aggregate demand.
Primary spending increased by 29.3% in nominal terms, per annum, during the April-May period, indicating that government spending continued to rise at a high pace in the second quarter.
This observation is also supported by the January-June figures of the Treasury's primary cash balance.
External demand continues to support the economic activity.
Industrial production was strong in May with the stimulus of exports.
Leading indicators suggest that export growth remained robust also in June and July.
Strong external demand and ongoing productivity gains should support the export growth in the forthcoming period.
However, considering the strong second-half figures of last year, the annual rate of growth in exports is expected to moderate in the upcoming period.
The marked decline in inflation had a favorable impact on inflation expectations.
Improvement in the expectations should continue in the upcoming period as the inflation keeps declining.
However, the Committee reads the existing gap between medium-term inflation expectations and targets as a factor requiring caution.
In sum, while the developments in energy and food prices, public expenditures, and external demand since the last quarter of 2006 restrain the disinflation process, domestic demand and inflation continue to decelerate thanks to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening.
Recent developments are broadly in line with the April Inflation Report.
Therefore, adhering to the outlook presented in the Report, the Committee envisions a measured easing starting from the last quarter of 2007.
However, the exact timing and extent of the easing may vary depending on the incoming information regarding external demand, public expenditures and other determinants of medium term inflation outlook.
It should be stressed that this policy stance is based on the current information set and thus it should by no means be interpreted as a commitment on behalf of the Committee.
The Committee highlighted the following uncertainties that could necessitate a significant revision in the monetary policy outlook in either direction: 18.
Inflation expectations remain sticky, partly owing to the elevated headline inflation figures of the past year.
Uncertainties regarding the food and oil prices and the incomes policy in 2007 further add to the stickiness in inflation expectations.
The present gap between medium term expectations and targets suggests that the target inflation may have been serving less of an anchor recently.
This constitutes a risk for wage setting behavior, and hence, for services inflation.
Realization of such a risk would slowdown the pace of disinflation, possibly requiring a tighter-than-envisaged monetary policy.
There are certain services items, of which, inflation inertia is driven by structural factors and thus, cannot simply be explained by backward indexation.
Needless to say, these prices can hardly be influenced by monetary policy.
For example, annual rent inflation have remained sticky around 20 percent in the past three years, contributing to annual headline inflation by about one percentage points each year.
Rent inflation is expected to moderate in the next couple of months, and further stabilize in the medium to long term, as the housing supply keeps rising.
Nevertheless, the possibility that rent inflation will continue to exceed the other services inflation is considered as a risk factor against the disinflation process.
The monetary transmission mechanism has proven to be effective during the past year.
Despite the increase in non-interest government spending and the robust external demand that have restrained the speed of disinflation, monetary tightening has been successful to bring inflation back to the projected path heading towards the medium term targets.
However, in order to reach the medium term target of 4 percent, the domestic demand needs to stay under control for a while.
However, domestic demand conditions may turn less supportive for the disinflation process, once the prevailing uncertainties fade out and the long-term interest rates continue to decline during the second half of the year.
Such a situation could lead monetary policy to stay more cautious than implied by the baseline scenario.
Nonetheless, such an outcome would be less likely, should the cautious monetary policy stance backed by fiscal discipline.
Possible fluctuations in the global liquidity conditions continue to pose risks to the inflation outlook.
The inflation and growth outlook for the developed economies are still not clear, and thus, international financial markets continue to be sensitive to new data releases.
Ongoing uncertainties over the global imbalances stand out as another risk factor that might lead to abrupt changes in portfolio preferences and liquidity conditions.
The Central Bank of Turkey will limit the potential inflationary effects of a possible shift in risk perceptions by pursuing an active liquidity management strategy.
In this respect, the Committee, considering the current levels of liquidity, assessed that the Central Bank Liquidity Bills could be used, in addition to the current tools used in open market operations, to enhance the effectiveness of liquidity management when necessary.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the economic program remain to be important for long-term stability.
Particularly, advances in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are monitored closely with regard to their effects on both macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices fell by 0.73 percent in July, bringing annual inflation rate down to 6.90 percent.
The cumulative decline in annual inflation over the past four months reached 4 percentage points.
Annual inflation in both the processed and unprocessed food groups decreased in July.
Despite the rise in annual inflation in vegetable prices in July, annual inflation in the unprocessed food group declined to 8.92 percent, down by 4.3 percentage points from the previous month, thanks to continued correction in fruit prices.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in processed food prices fell by 0.53 percentage points due to primarily last year’s base effect.
In the second half of 2006, processed food prices had surged significantly because of the pass-through from depreciation in the local currency (YTL) and owing to price movements mostly in the bread and cereal products group.
Price developments in the energy group supported the disinflation process in July.
Despite the high level of crude oil prices in international markets, domestic fuel prices displayed a decline on the back of strong YTL.
In addition, the favorable trend in the prices of utilities and other energy items for housing group continued.
Consumer durables prices, which displayed a downward trend in April-June period, continued this favorable course in July as well and annual inflation in this group came down to minus 2.15 percent.
Another noteworthy development in July was the downturn in the annual inflation of clothing and footwear prices, after a period of successive price increases in the first half of 2007.
Committee (the Committee) noted the favorable developments in services inflation since early 2007.
The slowdown in annual services inflation became more pronounced in July.
The monthly inflation rates have declined in all sub-groups (rent, restaurants-hotels, transportation and all other services) compared to the same month of the previous year.
Annual services inflation fell by 2 percentage points in the first seven months of 2007, the restaurants-hotels group contributed most to this decline.
The lowest annual inflation among the main service expenditure groups was observed in communication services with 3.50 percent.
The impact of the rate cut in local calls on communication services prices in late July will be observed largely in August.
Notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food prices, inflation continues to decelerate owing to the lagged effects of the strong monetary tightening.
Annual inflation in all core measures declined in July.
This was mainly driven by the favorable price developments for durable goods and services.
The downward trend in the annual rate of increase of the mostly cited core indicator-H (CPI excluding food, energy, alcohol-tobacco and gold) became more evident in July.
The seasonally adjusted monthly inflation measured by using this index continued to slow down.
On the other hand, the Committee emphasized that the decline in unprocessed food prices observed last year in August may not recur this year, and consequently noted that food prices and the annual inflation rate might display a temporary rise in August.
The Committee assessed that the recent data on economic activity and inflation are consistent with the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report.
While private sector investment and consumption demand exhibit signs of recovery, external demand is moderating and aggregate demand conditions continue to support the disinflation process.
Leading indicators for the second quarter of the year suggest that private consumption expenditures displayed a trend similar to the one in the first quarter.
The slowdown in domestic sales of white goods observed since the third quarter of last year continued in the second quarter of 2007 as well.
Similarly, domestic sales of automobiles and imports of consumer goods slowed down during this period.
Moreover, the pace of real growth in consumer loans was moderate compared to the first half of 2006.
Hence, private consumption spending, in seasonally adjusted terms, is expected to increase moderately in the second quarter of the year compared to the first quarter.
On the other hand, June and July data on domestic sales of automobiles, various consumption indices and domestic sales of commercial vehicles point to a recovery in private investment and consumption demand, starting from the third quarter of the year.
Investment spending displayed a moderate growth trend.
While imports of capital goods and production of electrical machinery increased in the second quarter of the year, machinery-equipment production and sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles decreased in seasonally adjusted terms compared to the first quarter.
Meanwhile, the fall in construction permits in the first quarter compared to the same period of the previous year signals a relative slowdown in construction sector.
However, the construction investments may continue to display high growth rates throughout the year, since current construction investments are closely related to past construction permits.
In the first half of 2007, non-interest budget expenditures increased noticeably by 25.7 percent compared to the same period of 2006.
This development indicates that public expenditures in recent months may have restrained the disinflation process.
Based on the projected end-year budget targets, non- interest public expenditures are expected to slow down significantly in the second half of the year.
Thus, it is likely that the stimulus from the public expenditures to the aggregate demand may cease in the second half of 2007.
It is of critical importance for the continuity of disinflation process that potential measures that may be taken to achieve the program-defined non-interest budget targets would be implemented by cutting expenditures rather than tax adjustments and that incomes policy for 2008 is conducted in harmony with the medium-term inflation targets.
External demand maintained its strong course in the second quarter of the year.
In this period, exports increased by 13.2 percent in annual terms.
According to the data announced by the Turkish Exporters Assembly, the strong performance of exports continued in July as well.
The robust course of external demand and the competitive advantage brought by productivity gains are expected to support export growth in the near future.
However, it is expected that the strong base effect that will be effective from September onwards will restrain annual growth rate of exports.
The strong performance of exports has supported industrial production.
Although year-over-year industrial production increased only modestly in June due to the high base in the same period of 2006, seasonally adjusted data point to a moderate growth in the second quarter of the year compared to the previous quarter.
Domestic demand has significantly slowed down after the monetary tightening in 2006.
The slowdown in domestic demand is affecting inflation with a lag.
This effect is particularly noticeable in services prices.
Although domestic demand may partly recover in the second half of the year, aggregate demand conditions are expected to support the disinflation process—thanks to declining contribution of net exports and the government spending.
Therefore, the underlying disinflation is expected to continue in the upcoming period.
However, significant risks remain to the inflation outlook on both sides: 15.
Volatile food prices lead to unpredictable movements in headline inflation.
Moreover, bad crop of wheat poses risks on the consumer prices through the prices of bread and grain products.
The Central Bank does not react to the temporary movements in unprocessed food prices, however closely monitors these developments since they can effect inflation expectations.
It should also be noted that the risks posed by the food prices are not one sided, as the base effects may result in favorable surprises in the forthcoming period.
The stickiness in inflation expectations is considered as an important risk to the inflation outlook.
Although the headline inflation has been easing down significantly in the past four months, inflation expectations of financial market participants have not shown any improvement.
Corporate sector expectations are still significantly above the medium term targets despite the downward trend in the past couple of months.
The prevailing gap between medium term inflation expectations and the targets poses uncertainties on the wage setting behavior—especially in the public sector—and hence the service prices, pointing to the risk of a slower-than-envisaged pace of disinflation.
Materialization of such a risk could result in a more cautious policy than stated in the July Inflation Report.
The Committee closely monitors the developments in the international liquidity conditions and the credit markets.
Recent market volatility has the potential to effect inflation through several distinct channels: In the short term the depreciation in domestic currency and the subsequent pass-through may have an inflationary impact, although this impact would partly be offset by the decline in oil and other commodity prices driven by rising concerns over the outlook for global growth.
On the other hand, the recent developments in the international liquidity conditions and the credit markets will contain the downward trend in the bank lending rates, and also curb the banks’ appetite for extending credit.
Accordingly, likelihood of the materialization of the risk that “domestic demand conditions may turn less supportive for the disinflation process, once the prevailing uncertainties fade out and the long-term interest rates continue to decline during the second half of the year”, as quoted in the last months Summary of the .
Committee Meeting, has been reduced.
In this respect, the Committee, as of the meeting date, maintained the policy stance outlined in the Inflation Report, and thus envisioned a measured easing starting from the last quarter of 2007.
However, the Committe added that the exact timing and the extent of the easing may vary depending on the incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, public expenditures and other determinants of medium term inflation outlook.
The developments in the global markets and their reflections on the domestic markets are closely monitored.
The Central Bank will utilize the available tools to mitigate the adverse impact of developments in the global markets on the inflation outlook.
Within this framework, the Committee, during the meeting, also assessed liquidity developments in the domestic money market, and evaluated liquidity management strategies.
The YTL liquidity is expected to be at sufficient levels in the forthcoming period.
However, barring extraordinary market fluctuations, the Central Bank, by using existing open market operation tools, may regulate the liquidity levels on both sides when needed, to ensure that the overnight rates in the money market stay close to the Central Bank borrowing rates.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient for securing the resilience of the economy to global shocks.
Consumer prices rose by 0.02 percent in August, bringing annual inflation to 7.39 percent.
As predicted in the summary of the previous .
Committee (the Committee) meeting, the rise in annual inflation rate was due to price increases in the unprocessed food group.
Favorable developments in the prices of other goods and services suggest that this recent increase in annual inflation rate would be temporary.
Volatility in the unprocessed food prices, which has been experienced since early 2007, also continued in August.
According to seasonally adjusted figures, there was a notable rise in the prices of the unprocessed food group last month, due to price hikes primarily in fresh vegetables and also to a lesser extent in unprocessed food products other than fresh vegetables and fruits.
Annual inflation rate in the processed food group, on the other hand, fell in August thanks to last year’s base effect.
Favorable developments in the prices of the energy sector have continued in August.
Prices of energy items for housing group displayed a limited increase, while domestic fuel prices dropped following the decline in crude oil prices in international markets.
Overall, price developments in the energy group, with a 2.56 percent year-to-date inflation rate, have supported the disinflation process.
Strong monetary tightening continues to be effective on prices of consumer durables.
In line with the slowdown in demand, the prices of consumer durables group have declined in the last five months and this trend has spread across the group.
As of August, the annual inflation rate in this group came down to – 2.80 percent.
The Committee noted that the recent developments in services inflation have been more favorable than expected.
The downward trend that has been observed in the services inflation since the beginning of 2007 has became more significant in August.
Annual inflation in all services items has come down, with rents being the most remarkable.
Following the benign course of fuel prices, annual services inflation in the transportation group declined in August.
Recent rate cuts in local phone calls affected telecommunication group, as expected.
The impact of monetary tightening on disinflation was also evident in core CPI measures.
The annual rate of increase in the widely cited core indicator-H (CPI excluding food, energy, alcohol-tobacco and gold), which has been declining since April, continued to fall in August.
Seasonally adjusted monthly changes in this index have also indicated a downward trend in inflation.
In light of these assessments the Committee concluded that the improvement in services inflation was beyond expectations, while developments in other price categories were in line with the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report.
Gross Domestic Product increased by 3.9 percent in the second quarter of 2007 compared to the same quarter of the previous year.
In that period the contribution of net external demand decreased but remained positive, whereas the contribution of domestic demand increased moderately.
Of the domestic demand components, private consumption expenditures declined in annual terms as projected in the July Inflation Report.
This can be attributed to the lagged effects of monetary tightening on the demand for consumer durables.
Meanwhile, investment expenditures accelerated in the same period and became the main determinant of the growth in domestic demand.
The analysis of seasonally adjusted expenditures showed that the key developments in the second quarter were the increases in public investment expenditures and private sector machinery-equipment investments.
The contribution of public expenditures to the GDP was almost half of the overall growth rate.
As stipulated in the Summary of the .
Committee Meeting in August, private consumption demand followed a trend similar to the one observed in the first quarter and increased modestly compared to the previous quarter.
Against this background, the moderate growth in the domestic demand has continued.
Leading indicators for the third quarter point to a recovery in private consumption demand.
According to seasonally adjusted figures, domestic sales of automobiles in the July-August period, domestic sales of white goods, and imports of consumer goods in July increased significantly compared to the previous quarter.
The Committee noted that despite recent upsurge, sales figures remained well below the levels seen in the first half of 2006.
On the other hand, the July-August average of the CNBC-e consumption index was well above its second-quarter level, while consumer confidence indices confirmed the recovery in private consumption demand.
The pace of consumer loans in recent months also revealed a similar outlook.
The recovery in investment demand, which has started in the second quarter, has continued in the third quarter as well.
Imports of capital goods picked up in July and commercial vehicle sales in the July-August period increased noticeably compared to the same period last year.
Seasonally adjusted figures were also significantly above their second quarter levels.
Other indicators for investment demand, such as imports of machinery-equipment and electrical machinery, also indicated an upward trend in the third quarter.
All in all, initial readings in the third quarter pointed out acceleration in investment demand, particularly in investment good imports.
There was a noticeable increase in public expenditures in the second quarter, which contributed as many as 1.8 percentage points—almost half of the total value added—to annual GDP growth and slowed down the disinflation process.
While forming the inflation outlook, the Committee projected that, in line with budget targets for 2007, there would be a significant decline in the contribution of public expenditures to growth in the second half of the year, and that would restrain the growth in total domestic demand.
Despite the strong course of external demand, the rate of increase in imports exceeded the growth rate of exports in June and July, following the recovery in domestic demand.
While the robust course of exports is expected to continue for the rest of the year, there may be a slow down in annual growth rates due to loss of working days caused by religious holidays and the last year’s high base effect.
As the growth of imports outpace that of exports, net exports are expected to have a negative effect on GDP growth in the second half of the year.
Since mid-2006 strong monetary tightening has restrained the growth rate in employment, particularly in services sector.
The downward trend in non- agricultural unemployment rate has ceased in recent periods, easing the pressure on wages.
It is believed that this outlook will be maintained provided that the incomes policy is conducted in harmony with the inflation target.
Meanwhile, ongoing productivity gains in the manufacturing industry is another factor that restrains unit labor costs.
In sum, it is projected that the recovery in private investment and consumption demand will continue without a significant acceleration, the contribution of external demand and public expenditures to growth will decrease and thus, aggregate demand and capacity conditions will continue to support the disinflation process.
Since the impact of monetary policy on economic activity and inflation is observed with a lag, the Committee takes the monetary policy decisions on a medium term perspective.
In this respect, it is particularly important to identify the short term temporary movements from medium term trends.
Recent readings reveal important information on the medium term inflation trends: 17.
Although the headline CPI inflation was up in August, several sub-items of the index indicated significant favorable developments.
The deceleration in services inflation is promising for the medium term inflation trend.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted figures of the core indices suggest that the underlying inflation is moving towards the medium term targets.
Recently announced GDP figures confirmed that the domestic demand has continued to slow down in the second quarter of 2007, on the back of the last years’ monetary tightening.
Although private domestic demand is expected to pick up in the second half of the year, disinflationary impacts of the significant slowdown observed in the past four quarters is expected to last for a while.
In this respect, inflation is expected to further decelerate owing to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening, notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food prices.
The developments in international liquidity conditions and credit markets are closely monitored.
The Committee reemphasizes that these developments should be evaluated with a medium term perspective.
Further deepening of the international credit and money market concerns is likely to affect the Turkish economy as well as other countries.
Such a development would lead to a tightening in credit conditions and thus support the disinflation process in the medium term through the demand channel.
In fact, recently the banks have been less willing to extend credits and the downward trend in consumer loan rates has subsided.
Besides its impact on domestic demand, the Committee members have highlighted that recent developments in global credit markets have raised the concerns of a slowdown in global economic activity, increasing the downside risks on external demand.
Accordingly, recent developments on inflation as well as domestic and global growth prospects imply an improved outlook for medium term inflation.
Moreover, the Committee assesses that global developments are likely to restrain both the domestic and external demand, increasing the downward risks on achieving the 4 percent target in the medium term.
As explained through the main policy documents on the general framework of the inflation targeting regime, the Central Bank will be equally responsive to the upside and downside risks to attaining the target.
Observing the higher downside risks on medium term inflation implied by recent developments and referring to the conditional statement stipulated in the July Inflation Report, the Committee decided that current conditions call for initiating the measured rate cuts mentioned in the Inflation Report, and lowered the policy rates by 25 basis points.
The Committee underlines that the current monetary policy stance continues to be restrictive.
Besides the developments in global markets, other important risks to the inflation outlook can be described as follows: 22.
Significant hikes in public expenditures were the main factor restraining the disinflation process in the first half of the year.
Adhering to the government’s budget projections, the Committee’s medium term inflation outlook rests on the assumption of a significant slowdown in public expenditures during the second half of the year.
Developments on the opposite direction would pose risks to the aggregate demand, and therefore to the medium term inflation outlook.
The Committee closely monitors the developments in public spending.
Food inflation continues to be a risk to the inflation outlook.
Not only the volatile vegetable and fruit prices but also the adverse developments in grain productsowing to low crop yields driven by drought conditionsare affecting the food prices.
The projections on the harvest of grain products for 2007 suggest that these developments may persist for a while.
Sustained increases in international soft commodity prices, especially for wheat and corn, add to the risks on food prices.
The Committee members think that monetary policy should not react to the volatility in food prices so long as the second round effects are contained.
Oil prices have continued to rise recently.
Although strong domestic currency limits the impact of oil prices on domestic prices, past cumulative increases in oil prices require caution for second round effects.
Especially, uncertainty pertaining to the electricity prices are considered as a major risk factor for the medium term outlook.
Inflation expectations remain sticky.
Despite the significant fall in inflation in line with the Committee’s projections, medium term expectations have not shown any improvement.
Although survey based expectations are among the main indicators monitored by the Central Bank, the Committee observes that their information content can vary in time.
In particular, the Committee members perceive the existing stickiness in expectations as more of a structural phenomenon arising from transition from high to low inflation episode.
Therefore, the Committee predicts that inflation expectations would eventually adjust to lower levels, as the inflation further decelerates in the medium term.
At the same time, the Committee believes that Central Bank can have an active role in realigning public’s inflation expectations by putting more emphasis on its own institutional forecast.
These risks not only require the monetary easing process to be cautious and measured, but also increase the degree of data dependency of the fortcoming policy decisions.
The exact timing and extent of further easing may vary with the incoming information on global liquidity conditions, external demand, public expenditures and other determinants of medium term inflation outlook.
Should the risk perceptions deteriorate significantly in the forthcoming period, the Central Bank may resort to an active liquidity management strategy to contain the short-term effects of a possible volatility in the financial markets.
Under current conditions, the role of fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical for improving the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
Advances in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are monitored closely with a special emphasis on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices increased by 1.03 percent in September, bringing year-on- year inflation rate down to 7.12 percent.
As foreseen in the summary of the previous .
Committee (the Committee) Meeting, annual inflation continued to decelerate in September, following a temporary rise in August.
The volatility in the prices of fresh vegetables and fruits impede the predictability of monthly inflation figures.
Moreover, processed food prices have displayed sharp increases over the last several months, due to temperatures above seasonal averages and drought conditions as well as the Ramadan effect.
The course of food prices has increased the importance of core indicators excluding the food group.
Therefore, the Committee noted that it would be useful to underscore the ongoing deceleration in non-food inflation.
Although energy prices continued to rise in September, at a much higher rate than the past few months due to soaring crude oil prices, they still supported the disinflation process in the first nine months of the year.
There may be some price increases in certain energy group items such as electricity and water in the upcoming period.
The Committee assessed that the impact of these rate hikes on inflation would be temporary.
The slowdown in services prices, which has become evident since July, was quite strong in September, bringing annual services inflation down by 2.5 percent in the past three months.
Although the pace of disinflation process is particularly noteworthy in rents and restaurants-hotels group, the deceleration in services inflation is quite visible in other items as well.
Since the beginning of the year, annual inflation rate has declined by 3 percentage points in rents and 5 percentage points in transportation services.
The effect of monetary tightening on special CPI aggregates has been quite visible.
The slowdown in seasonally adjusted monthly increases in the widely cited core indicator, H-index (CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, alcohol-tobacco and gold), confirms the downward trend in inflation.
All in all, notwithstanding the risks related to energy, food and administered prices, inflation is expected to decelerate owing to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening.
The Committee assesses that the second-quarter Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data point to a moderate growth in domestic demand and economic activity.
In this period, private and public investments were the main drivers of domestic demand growth, whereas the increase in private consumption demand was rather limited.
Leading indicators for the third quarter point to an ongoing recovery in private investment expenditures.
Domestic sales of commercial vehicles recorded high growth rates in both annual and quarterly terms.
While the machinery- equipment production for the July-August period remained below the second quarter levels, electrical machinery production continued to increase in the same period, albeit at a slower pace.
In the July-August period, imports of capital goods, an indicator of investment demand, displayed a noticable rise compared to the second quarter.
To sum up, initial readings in the third quarter indicated a strong recovery in investment demand, although that demand is mainly for imported goods.
Consumption demand has started to recover in the third quarter.
The composition of the aggregate demand has been shifting in favor of domestic demand.
According to seasonally adjusted figures, domestic sales of white goods, imports of consumer goods for the July-August period, and domestic sales of automobiles for the third quarter grew significantly over the preceding quarter.
Third-quarter average of the CNBC-e consumption index is above its second-quarter level, and consumer confidence indices confirm the modest recovery in consumption demand.
The Committee assesses that the aforementioned developments indicate a modest recovery in domestic demand, rather than an overheating in the economy, following the slowdown since the second half of 2006.
Although quarterly growth rates of real consumer credit have been somewhat rising recently, they still remain below the periods where domestic demand was more robust.
Likewise, domestic sales of automobiles, despite the recent recovery in the third quarter, remains at modest levels.
Industrial production figures in August and estimates for September also confirm the moderate growth in domestic production.
Industrial production for the July-August period increased by 5 percent compared to the same period last year, while seasonally adjusted figures indicate a slight increase over the preceding quarter.
Despite the recent recovery, furniture manufacturing, a sub-sector believed to reflect consumer demand, is still below the level it reached during the first half of 2006, when the domestic demand was strong.
While growth in exports has maintained its strong pace, the rate of increase in imports has surpassed that of exports in the June-August period due to the recovery in domestic demand and the appreciation of the Turkish lira.
Therefore, it is projected that the contribution of net exports to GDP growth in the second half of the year will be negative.
To sum up, readings on recent economic activity are in line with the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report.
While private consumption and investment demand exhibits signs of recovery, external demand moderates and aggregate demand conditions continue to support the disinflation process.
This trend is likely to continue in the upcoming period as well.
The upward trend in crude oil prices persisted in the recent period.
In addition, other commodity prices also continued to be on the rise.
Prices of agricultural products used as main inputs for processed food, such as wheat and corn, continue to rise.
However, the strong domestic currency partially offsets the rise in crude oil and other commodity prices and curbs input costs.
Lagged effects of monetary tightening since the second half of 2006 seems to have curtailed the unit labor costs in the overall economy, primarily in the services sector.
Downward trend in unit labor costs in the manufacturing industry confirms this view.
Although no wage data for the services sector is available, a similar conclusion might well be drawn for this sector in view of the slowdown in the growth rate of employment and prices.
The Committee assessed that the September rate cut decision led to a significant fall in both the medium and long-term interest rates, reducing the downward risks on medium term inflation posed by global economic developments.
In light of these developments, the Committee decided to continue the measured rate cuts.
The Committee underlines that the current level of the short-term interest rates remains restrictive even after the recent policy rate cuts.
The Committee assesses that, under the current policy stance envisaging a measured and cautious rate cut cycle, the risks on attaining the inflation target in the medium term are balanced.
Considering the downward trend in interest rates, the Committee decided to narrow the gap between borrowing and lending rates in order to limit the extent of potential upside fluctuations in overnight interest rates.
In this regard, borrowing rates are reduced by 50 basis points, while lending rates are cut by 75 basis points.
It should be noted, however, that main policy instrument of the Central Bank is the overnight borrowing rates, and thus the additional cut in lending rates is merely a technical adjustment.
The Committee stated that the timing and extent of further easing would depend on the incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, public expenditures and other determinants of the medium term inflation outlook.
In other words, the future monetary policy decisions will be data dependent.
Main risks to the inflation and monetary policy outlook can be summarized as follows: 20.
The Committee closely monitors the developments in international liquidity conditions and credit markets.
As of today, a sharp slowdown on global economic growth is not perceived as the most likely scenario, leading to continued capital flows to emerging markets.
However, that the risks in the financial markets have not yet been adequately priced necessitates caution.
The CBT, in case of a heightened risk aversion and a decline in risk appetite towards emerging financial markets, will aim at limiting the effects of possible market fluctuations on inflation outlook by pursuing an active liquidity management strategy, as well as by utilizing other policy instruments if needed.
Recent volatility in credit markets has partially offset the upside risks to the aggregate demand mentioned in the July Inflation Report.
However, there are some remaining risks to the demand outlook.
On one side, the extent to which the recent decline in longer-term rates will stimulate the domestic demand is yet to be observed.
On the other side, a sharper-than-envisaged slowdown in global growth will ease both the external demand and, through the tighter credit conditions, the domestic demand.
Financing conditions and credit developments will continue to be closely monitored in the face of these upside and downside risks.
If credit conditions turn out to be more favorable than expected and the domestic demand accelerates, this may lead to a more cautious policy stance than implied by the baseline scenario, as well as the use of policy tools other than short term interest rates, such as required reserves and alike.
Likewise, materialization of downside risks would lead to a downward adjustment in the policy stance.
As of the meeting date, medium term outlook is based on the assumption that government expenditure targets will be met in 2008 and incomes policy will be set in line with inflation targets.
On the other hand, the fact that efforts to readjust the primary budget balance are more focused on increases in indirect taxes as opposed to expenditure cuts poses a risk to the predictability of inflation.
The sustained rise in food prices is considered as an important risk to the inflation outlook.
Our medium term projection envisages a gradual correction in which food inflation converges to headline inflation in the medium term.
However, low crop yields in 2007 and recent global trends have increased upside risks to the food inflation.
On the other hand, past cumulative hikes have created a high base in food prices, increasing the possibility of a downward adjustment.
Potential volatility in food prices continue to pose risks to the inflation outlook on both sides, since food prices constitute a large fraction of the CPI index.
The Committee will not react to the developments in food prices as long as the second round effects are contained.
There are some uncertainties over the medium term impact of the recent developments in energy prices.
Owing to cumulative increases in international oil and natural gas prices, recently the need to make a sizeable adjustment in electricity prices has been on the agenda.
The price of water, classified as an energy item in the CPI, may also display a significant rise in the last quarter of 2007, although the rate of increase may differ across regions.
Moreover, international crude oil prices have continued its upward course.
Medium term impact of the rise in energy prices on inflation will be limited, as long as the inflation expectations and the price setting behavior remains intact.
However, since the energy price is an important factor of production, it should also be added that recent developments in energy prices have compelled the CBT to be relatively more cautious.
On the other hand, switching to a cost-based automatic pricing mechanism in electricity would reduce the risks on shortage of supply as well as on price stability.
Turkey has taken significant steps towards price stability in recent years.
However, it is not yet possible to define the current state as price stability.
The CBT will continue to exercise its policy instruments to attain price stability and thus to improve welfare of the society in the medium term.
During this process, it is particularly important not to sacrifice long-term permanent gains in favor of temporary benefits.
The support of fiscal policy and structural reforms are also critical in achieving price stability.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the economic program remain to be of concern.
Particularly, advances in structural reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline are monitored closely with regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices rose by 1.81 percent in October, bringing annual inflation to 7.70 percent.
The main source of increase in annual inflation rate was the prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages, which posted a month-on-month increase of 3.41 percent.
The recent run-up in food prices has continued to have an adverse effect on consumer prices, in Turkey as well as the rest of the world.
Both processed and unprocessed food inflation maintained its upward trend in October due to drought- related supply shortfalls.
The year-on-year increase in the prices of food and non- alcoholic beverages reached 14.71 percent.
Meanwhile, non-food inflation continued its downward trend and declined to 5 percent.
The annual inflation in energy group dropped to 4.82 percent in October.
Continued strength of the New Turkish lira limited the impact of the sharp rise in crude oil prices on domestic fuel prices.
The increase in the prices of energy items for housing group was also limited.
Committee (the Committee) noted that the prices of energy group would increase in November due to new municipal water tariffs in Istanbul, the hikes in the Special Consumption Tax levied on fuel products, and the record-high oil prices in global markets.
The slowdown in the annual inflation of goods excluding energy and food has continued in October.
The decline in the annual inflation rate of consumer durables and clothing-footwear group in particular has lowered the year-on-year increase in the prices of goods excluding energy and food to 2 percent.
Annual services inflation did not display a significant change in October.
The increase in the annual growth rate of prices of restaurants-hotels and communication services suspended the downtrend in annual services inflation.
Recently, prices of restaurants- hotels have been under pressure from the rapidly rising food prices.
Prices in other services, on the other hand, maintained their moderate course.
The Committee assessed that the hikes in administered prices might delay the disinflation process in the short run.
The impact of these adjustments will be observed mostly in November.
The tax hikes in fuel and tobacco products and the new water tariffs are likely to contribute around 0.8 points to monthly inflation in November.
In addition, the expected adjustments to electricity and natural gas prices may delay the downward trend in inflation.
On the other hand, a partial correction in the prices of unprocessed food group is likely to offset some of the pressure on November inflation.
Notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food prices, inflation is expected to decelerate in the medium term owing to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening.
Readings on recent economic activity are in line with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.
While private consumption and investment demand shows signs of recovery, external demand has been moderating and aggregate demand conditions have continued to support the disinflation process.
Indicators for the third quarter economic activity point to a recovery in private consumption.
During this period, domestic sales of automobiles and white goods as well as imports of consumer goods recorded noticeable growth in seasonally adjusted terms, compared to the second quarter.
The CNBC-e consumption index and the October figures for domestic sales of automobiles suggest that the recovery in private consumption continues in the fourth quarter.
Recent data on consumer loans also display a similar pattern.
The Committee noted that, despite the recent recovery, the quarterly growth rate in consumer loans still remains below the levels recorded in the first half of 2006 when the domestic demand was strong.
Import figures of capital goods indicate that the recovery in investment has continued in the third quarter.
October figures of domestic sales of light commercial vehicles suggest a similar trend in investment demand in the fourth quarter.
The recovery in investment demand is mostly import-driven, which contains the capacity pressures on economic activities.
Moreover, it should be noted that the domestic sales of commercial vehicles is still at low levels compared to the episodes when the domestic demand was strong.
Under the current policy stance envisaging a measured and cautious rate cut cycle, the domestic demand is expected to continue to recover at a moderate pace.
Industrial production figures also point to an ongoing modest growth in economic activity in the third quarter of 2007.
Industrial production for this period increased by 4 percent compared to the same quarter of the previous year, but it remained nearly flat in seasonally adjusted terms, with a slight increase of 0.4 percent over the preceding quarter.
The Committee assessed that the slowdown in industrial production observed in September would be temporary.
Leading indicators for the fourth quarter signal a relatively stronger industrial production in October.
External demand and productivity gains continue to support exports.
On the other hand, the recovery in domestic demand and the relative price effect raised the demand for imported goods, reducing the contribution of net exports to GDP.
In fact, the quarter-on-quarter growth in import surpassed that of exports in real terms in 2007 Q3.
Therefore, the contribution of net foreign demand to GDP growth is likely to be negative in the second half of 2007.
Turning to cost pressures on inflation, crude oil prices have been on the rise since August.
In addition, agricultural commodity prices have continued to follow an upward trend due to drought-related supply shortfalls and increased demand for agricultural products in bio-fuel production.
However, strong New Turkish Lira has partially offset the adverse effects of rising commodity prices on domestic inflation.
Unit labor costs declined in the first half of the year thanks to ongoing productivity gains in the manufacturing industry, albeit at a slower rate.
Recent increases in industrial production as well as current trends in employment and wages suggest that unit labor costs maintained their downward trend in the third quarter.
In light of these assessments, the Committee maintained the policy stance in the October Inflation Report, assessing that the risks against attaining the inflation target in the medium run are balanced under a measured and cautious rate cut cycle.
It should be underlined that the current level of short-term interest rates remains restrictive even after the recent rate cuts.
As a matter of fact, inflation in durable goods and services—CPI sub items sensitive to monetary policy stance—display a benign course.
The Committee underscored the need for close monitoring of services inflation in assessing the medium term outlook, as it represents the nontradable component of inflation that is more sensitive to demand and less sensitive to exchange rates.
The timing and extent of further easing will depend on incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, public expenditures and other determinants of the medium term inflation outlook.
There are both upside and downside risks to the medium term outlook: 17.
Market interest rates came down significantly in the past couple of months, partly owing to the increased accommodation in monetary policy.
However, ongoing uncertainty in mature credit markets limits the impact of monetary easing on domestic demand.
Yet, the lagged impact of recent rate cuts on credit and consumption growth remains to be seen.
On the other hand, the possibility of a sharper-than-expected slowdown in global growth poses a downside risk on aggregate demand.
The Committee thus underlined that both domestic and external demand conditions should be monitored closely.
There is still uncertainty as to the impact of difficulties in credit markets on global financial flows.
The Central Bank of Turkey (the CBT), in case of a heightened risk aversion and a decline in risk appetite towards emerging financial markets, will aim at limiting the effects of possible market fluctuations on inflation outlook by pursuing an active liquidity management strategy, as well as by utilizing other policy instruments if needed.
The contribution of food prices on annual inflation reached to 4 percentage points in October.
Food prices continue to pose risk on inflation forecasts.
Lower food production due to adverse weather conditions and ongoing uncertainties on crop yields has been affecting food inflation all over the world.
On the other hand, past cumulative hikes have created a high base in food prices, increasing the possibility of a downward correction.
Besides the food prices, recently crude oil prices have also followed a higher course than the level assumed in our baseline scenario in the October Inflation Report.
The rise in the price of oil affects inflation not only through energy prices but also through food prices, as the increased demand for bio-fuels drives up world prices for many farm products.
The Committee considers the impact of administered price hikes on inflation as temporary.
Survey respondents appear to agree with this view, as the medium term inflation expectations have not deteriorated after the announcement of price hikes.
Nonetheless, it should also be added that possible increases in electricity and natural gas prices have compelled the Committee to be relatively more cautious.
To sum up, energy and food prices continue to pose risks to the inflation outlook.
The CBT will not react to first round impacts of these developments.
Potential second round effects of rising food and energy prices, however, will be closely monitored.
Finally, it should be emphasized that the support of fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical in achieving price stability.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the economic program, which will ensure the sustainability of productivity gains, remain to be of concern.
Consumer prices rose by 1.95 percent in November, bringing the annual inflation to 8.40 percent.
Administered prices accounted for about 1 percentage point of the month-on-month increase in headline inflation.
The upward trend in the prices of processed food and catering services group suggest that the drought continued to be effective on food inflation in November as well.
Energy prices edged up sharply in November by 6.78 percent, raising the annual inflation in this group to 11.02 percent.
This was mainly attributable to the rise in the prices of fuel oil and LP gas, driven by hikes in the Special Consumption Tax, as well as to the new municipal water tariff in İstanbul.
Aside from adjustments in administered prices, the recent increase in international oil prices was also instrumental in the rise of energy prices.
The planned hikes in electricity and natural gas prices in the upcoming period, together with the future course of oil prices, pose a significant risk to energy prices.
Despite the decline in the prices of clothing and footwear, the year-on-year inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food posted an increase in November due to significant price hikes in processed food, tobacco products and gold.
The prices of consumer durables, on the other hand, maintained its downward trend in November.
Following the tax hikes on tobacco products, the prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco group increased by 6.51 percent month-on-month, bringing the annual inflation rate for this group to 17.21 percent.
In other words, nearly 0.85 percentage points of the annual CPI inflation stems from the tobacco prices.
Annual services inflation slightly increased in November due to the rise in the prices of recreational and cultural services, and restaurants and hotels group.
In line with sustained increases in food prices, catering services inflation has been accelerating recently.
Committee noted the continued slowdown in rents and transportation services inflation and assessed that recent developments in services inflation were favorable except for food price-driven increase in catering services inflation.
Adverse developments in food prices due to drought and global factors have put an upward pressure on core inflation indicators via higher prices of processed food and catering services.
Yet, the Committee assessed that readings on inflation do not present an unfavorable outlook when food-related items and administered prices are excluded.
Therefore, inflation is expected to decelerate further despite the upside risks related to food and energy prices.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 1.5 percent in the third quarter of 2007 compared with the same period of last year.
Seasonally adjusted figures, on the other hand, pointed to a 0.6 percent decline over the second quarter.
Domestic demand gave a strong boost to GDP, while the public sector contributed to growth at a slower rate; the contribution of net foreign demand, however, was noticeably negative.
While the lagged effects of the monetary tightening have continued, albeit at a weaker rate, temporary supply shocks in the agricultural sector have accentuated the slowdown in economic activity.
The contribution of private consumption demand to growth improved significantly over the third quarter, consistent with the leading indicators reported in previous reports.
In seasonally adjusted terms, private consumption demand, which has grown modestly since mid-2006, increased by 2.3 percent in this period compared to the previous quarter, mainly on the back of spending on durables and semi- or non-durables.
Despite the rebound in private consumption demand, the pace of public consumption showed little change from previous quarters, whereas restrictive measures on the fiscal side has shown its impact on public investments.
The recovery in domestic demand was mainly driven by private consumption, whereas private investments lost momentum on a quarterly basis.
Leading indicators for the fourth quarter points to a moderate recovery in economic activity.
Industrial production grew by 7.9 percent year-on-year in October and was up markedly from September in seasonally adjusted terms.
Indicators for private consumption and investment demand also suggest a similar outlook.
According to the seasonally adjusted data, following a downbeat reading in September, domestic sales of automobiles grew rapidly in the October-November period compared to the third quarter.
The CNBC-e consumption index also exceeded its third-quarter average.
Moreover, imports of consumer goods jumped in October compared to the same month last year.
Seasonally adjusted domestic sales of white goods also rebounded in October but remained below the third-quarter average.
Consumer loans also continue to increase at moderate rates.
The Committee assessed that, in addition to the lagged effects of monetary tightening, ongoing problems in global credit markets were restrictive on the growth of consumer loans in the fourth quarter of 2007.
The Committee underlined the essence of investments for the sustained productivity gains.
Despite a slowdown in machinery-equipment production, imports of machinery-equipment gained speed in October over September and also the preceding quarter.
In addition, both production and imports in the electrical machinery industry increased significantly on a year-on-year and per quarter basis.
Following a rebound in the third quarter, domestic sales of light commercial vehicles recorded high growth rates during the October-November period compared to the previous quarter.
Imports of capital goods grew sharply by 41.3 percent in October on a year-on-year basis and seasonally adjusted figures point to a continued acceleration.
In sum, leading indicators except for machinery-equipment production suggest that investments picked up in the fourth quarter on a yearly and quarterly basis.
Exports continue to expand owing to productivity gains and on the back of strong external demand.
Preliminary data indicate that exports recorded a high growth rate in November in dollar terms.
Nevertheless, according to quantity indices that exclude the price effect, real exports grew at a lower pace than real imports in the second half of the year.
The strengthening demand for imported goods, particularly automobiles and commercial vehicles and other capital goods, signal that the contribution of net foreign demand to growth will continue to be negative in the last quarter.
To sum up, the modest recovery of the private demand continues, while aggregate demand conditions continue to support the disinflation process on the back of slowdown in public expenditures and net external demand.
The Committee noted that the recent labor market developments also contain valuable information on the current state of the economy.
Readings on seasonally adjusted figures showed that the growth rate of services employment, particularly in wholesale/retail trade and in restaurants/hotels, has been slowing down since mid-2006.
This trend became more pronounced in the third quarter of 2007.
Accordingly, the decline in non-farm unemployment rate came to a halt in the past year.
Looser labor market is likely to restrain wage inflation in the overall economy.
While employment in the industrial sector posted a year-on-year decrease in the third quarter of 2007, labor productivity has maintained its upward trend.
Current trends in employment and production suggest that unit labor costs will slightly decline in the fourth quarter of 2007 owing to continued rise in productivity.
Drought and energy related supply shocks not only increase inflation temporarily but also have short term adverse effects on growth.
In fact, the contraction in the agricultural output in 2007 explains much of the recent dynamics in inflation and output.
The Committee underlined that the primary goal of the Central Bank of Turkey (the CBT) is to achieve price stability, and noted that monetary policy remains restrictive even after the recent rate cuts.
The CBT is focused on attaining the medium term inflation target of 4 percent, in a framework where monetary policy does not react to temporary and exogenous shocks.
The Committee, judging the recent rise in inflation as temporary, maintained the policy stance presented in the October Inflation Report, and assessed that, under a measured and cautious rate cut cycle, the risks against attaining the inflation target in the medium run are balanced.
The timing and extent of further easing will depend on incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
to the inflation and monetary policy outlook can be summarized as follows: 19.
Ongoing uncertainties in global financial markets had an adverse impact on consumer and investor confidence.
It has also tightened credit conditions, laying the ground for measured and cautious rate cuts.
Nonetheless, there are still difficulties in assessing the overall risk.
Uncertainties on global risk appetite and the extent of slowdown in global growth persist, which poses risks on the outlook for monetary policy.
Food prices remain as an important risk factor for inflation.
Besides the drought-related factors, increased demand for bio-fuels drives up world prices for many farm products such as corn and wheat.
Although there is some chance of a downward correction in unprocessed food prices, the processed food prices are likely to follow an elevated course in the short term.
Yet, food inflation is expected to normalize in the medium term.
Although administered prices led to a rise in headline inflation recently, the impact on medium term expectations was rather limited.
However, potential second round impacts of the planned hikes in electricity and natural gas prices compels the Committee to be cautious.
Accordingly, potential effects of rising food and energy prices on overall price setting behavior in the economy will be closely monitored.
Finally, it should be emphasized that the support of fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical for achieving and maintaining price stability.
Sustaining the productivity gains is essential for attaining price stability while preserving high growth rates.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the economic program, which will ensure the sustainability of productivity gains, remain to be critical.
Consumer prices rose by 0.22 percent in December.
After this reading annual inflation ended the year 2007 at 8.39 percent.
Services inflation resumed its downward trend in December thanks to favorable developments in the prices of rent and transportation services.
The prices of unprocessed food have stabilized, albeit partially, in the last two months of the year, leading to a reduction in the annual inflation of this sub- group.
Meanwhile, despite a relative slowdown, the processed food prices continued to increase at a rapid pace.
The 9.8 percent increase in processed food prices in the second half of the year adversely affected the core inflation indicators.
Recent data on precipitation indicates a more favorable weather outlook compared to the previous period, boding well for the future prices of unprocessed food group.
On the other hand, the response of processed food prices to agricultural supply shocks is likely to persist for some time; therefore, price increases in this group may continue for a while in 2008.
Energy prices rose by 0.89 percent in December due to hikes in energy items in the housing group.
With these hikes, annual inflation in the energy sub- group reached to 11.25 percent.
A marked rise in the annual inflation of the energy group is expected in January due to adjustment in the prices of electricity and natural gas.
The aforementioned price adjustment is expected to contribute by 0.6 points to CPI inflation in January.
Year on year increase in the prices of goods excluding energy and unprocessed food climbed to 6,60 percent due to increase in processed food inflation and the base effect in clothing-footwear group.
Meanwhile, the downward trend in the prices of consumer durables continued in December.
Despite a pick up in the prices of communication services, the services inflation dropped in December due to an ongoing moderation in the inflation of rents and transportation service prices.
Although year-on-year inflation in restaurants and hotels group continued its upward trend, the pace of monthly price increases in food services, which constitute a substantial part of this group, slowed down compared to the last three months.
Overall, inflation in services group decelerated by 3.6 percentage points in 2007 compared to the previous year and stood at 8.64 percent.
The Committee expects this downward trend in services inflation to proceed in the upcoming period.
A review of the year 2007 reveals that unfavorable developments in the prices of items outside the control of monetary policy such as food, energy and tobacco products were the main factors to slow down the downward trend in inflation.
The Committee assessed that the annual rate of increase of the CPI excluding the aforementioned groups followed a moderate course.
Readings on recent data indicate that the recovery in economic activity has continued in the last quarter of 2007.
Industrial production increased by 8.3 percent and 7.7 percent year-on-year in October and November, respectively, and the average of October-November period exceeded the third quarter average in seasonally adjusted terms.
Seasonally adjusted figures on capacity utilization suggest that the growth in industrial production has continued in December as well.
Leading indicators on consumption and investment present a similar outlook.
Domestic sales of automobiles increased by 36.6 percent quarter-on-quarter and picked up markedly in seasonally adjusted terms compared to the third quarter.
The moderate growth in consumer loans continued in December.
The month-on-month change in automobile loans was positive in real terms for the first time since June 2007.
Real imports of consumer goods, passenger cars and consumer durables in particular, increased significantly on a year-on-year basis in the last quarter of 2007.
The upward trend in the seasonally adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continued in the same period.
The Committee will closely monitor the upcoming data to assess whether the recent pickup in the demand for durables reflects a change in trend.
Leading indicators for investment demand point to an increase in machinery- equipment investments on a year-on-year and per quarter basis in the last quarter.
In the October-November period, imports of capital goods increased by 36.2 percent relative to the same period last year, exceeding the level recorded in the third quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
Following a rebound in the third quarter, sales of light commercial vehicles maintained the upward trend in the last quarter growing by 23.6 percent in annual terms and recording a discernible rise in seasonally adjusted terms over the third quarter.
Meanwhile, sales of heavy commercial vehicles have declined continuously on a monthly basis since September 2007, but rose by 1.6 percent year-on-year in the last quarter.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted figures on production and import of machinery-equipment and electrical machinery point to a pick up in investments in the last quarter.
In the third quarter, the number of construction permits, one of the leading indicators of construction investments, decreased by 10.8 percent on a year- on-year basis, while the annual growth rate of the construction sector significantly lagged behind the growth rates observed in previous periods.
The diffusion index of “the probability of purchasing or constructing a house in the next 12-month period”, compiled from the Consumer Confidence Survey, has followed a downward trend since July 2007 suggesting that the slowdown in the growth rate of housing construction is likely to persist in 2008.
Meanwhile, the significant rise in employment in the construction sector in seasonally adjusted terms during the second and third quarters of the year and a marked increase in the production of non-metallic minerals in the last quarter signal that the slowdown in construction sector would be rather modest.
In view of these data, the Committee assessed that the construction sector would continue to grow, albeit at a slower pace, in the upcoming period.
Exports rose by 13.5 percent in real terms compared to the same period last year according to quantity indices.
Early readings on December and January also point to a continued upward trend in exports.
Nevertheless, the growth rate of exports was surpassed by the growth rate of imports in the fourth quarter due to recovery in domestic demand and substantial increases in imports.
Therefore, the effect of net foreign demand on growth is likely to be negative in the fourth quarter.
The expected slowdown in the economic activity of developed countries has increased the downside risks on the course of exports.
In the third quarter of 2007, the pace of productivity growth fell behind real wages in the manufacturing industry, leading to an increase in unit labor costs.
Nonetheless, the slowdown in employment and the increase in productivity gains in the last quarter of the year points to a possible renewal of the downward trend in unit labor costs in the manufacturing industry.
Unit labor costs, which significantly contributed to the recent disinflation process as well as the export performance, will be closely monitored.
In this context, implementation of structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of productivity gains is still of utmost importance.
Considering the downside risks on global economy, the Committee emphasized that the efforts to support productivity gains via structural reforms will limit possible adverse effects of recent turbulence on exports and economic growth in the medium term.
In summary, readings on the last quarter of 2007 suggest that the economic activity has picked up markedly compared to the third quarter.
However, although indicators on demand conditions point to a higher growth than the first half of 2007, they are still below the level observed during periods of accelerated domestic demand.
Therefore, recent pick up in economic activity is considered as a gradual recovery rather than a strong acceleration.
To sum up, the Committee assessed that the economy continued to grow at a moderate pace.
The lagged effects of monetary tightening and the weakening of global credit conditions have restrained domestic demand.
Moreover, the expected slowdown in global economic activity may reduce the contribution of external demand to the economic growth in Turkey.
Accordingly, aggregate demand conditions should continue to support disinflation process in the upcoming period.
In this context, inflation is expected to decelerate despite the risks from food and energy prices.
Drought and energy related supply shocks not only increased inflation temporarily but also had short-term adverse effects on growth.
The Committee underlined that the primary goal of the Central Bank is to achieve and maintain price stability.
However, the CBT follows a medium term approach, and thus will not react aggressively to the shocks beyond the control of monetary policy, since doing so could create undesirable fluctuations in economic activity and distortions in relative prices.
This strategy implies that the CBT, faced with persisting supply shocks, may choose to tolerate inflation to exceed the target temporarily, as long as the second round effects are contained.
The Committee noted that monetary policy remains restrictive even after the recent rate cuts.
The modest growth rate of monetary indicators is also consistent with a relatively restrictive monetary stance.
Although medium term interest rates followed a downward trend in the past quarter, 2-year real rates at this point fluctuate between 9 and 10 percent, implying a non- accommodative monetary stance.
Recent developments in consumer credit also point to a similar picture.
Annual growth rates in the automobile and housing loans are at much lower levels compared to the periods of vigorous domestic demand.
Although consumer credit showed signs of recovery starting from the second quarter of 2007, cautious monetary policy stance and the tightening in global credit conditions are likely to restrain credit expansion in the forthcoming period.
Notwithstanding the expected fall in the underlying inflation, there are both upside and downside risks to the inflation outlook: 19.
The main upside risk factor for the current medium term inflation outlook is a potential second round effect of the accumulated supply shocks, which may also create a higher than expected inflation inertia, as currently manifested in the medium term inflation expectations.
So far, the second round impact of food prices has been limited and confined to selected sub-components of the overall index (such as restaurants and catering services).
The potential second round impact of elevated food and energy prices, however, should not be overlooked.
Therefore, the CBT will keep a close eye on the price setting behavior along with various core inflation measures.
The policy strategy will be to tolerate the first-round impact on inflation resulting from food, energy and one-off adjustments in administered prices, yet to remain responsive to the second round effects.
The Committee remains attentive to developments in global markets.
The potential impact of ongoing difficulties in the US credit markets, on the financial markets and the real economy, continue to create uncertainty about the course of the global economy.
Our baseline scenario assumes a soft landing in developed economies, with no major portfolio shock on the Turkish financial markets.
However, the probability of a sharper than expected slowdown should not be ruled out.
While the possibility of a sharper than envisaged slowdown in global economic activity, through a portfolio shock and its potential impact on the exchange rates, may constitute an upside risk for the short-term inflation outlook, it also poses downside risks for inflation in the medium term through a possible weakening in external demand and domestic credit.
It should be underlined that fiscal discipline of the past several years, by reducing the long-term risk premium, has been the key force allowing the achievement of robust output growth during a remarkable disinflation period.
Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy, during an episode of worsening risk appetite, is even more critical in preserving the resilience of the economy.
Our medium term projections are based on the assumption that government expenditure targets will be met in 2008.
Moreover, we assume that any extra need to readjust the primary budget balance will be implemented primarily through expenditure cuts rather than hikes in indirect taxes.
Therefore we envisage no major shocks arising from administered price adjustments, except the hikes in electricity and natural gas in the first quarter of 2008.
Any deviation from this assumption may alter the inflation and monetary policy outlook.
The recent increase in end-user energy prices may continue to exert some temporary upward pressure on headline inflation in the coming months.
However, these adjustments will also support lower inflation in the medium term as they contribute to a prudent fiscal stance and facilitate an expansion of the domestic energy production.
Hence the CBT’s policy is not to react to these price adjustments, except to contain second-round effects.
Developments in food prices are still considered as an important risk to the short-term inflation outlook, as food items constitute more than one fourth of the CPI basket.
The course of food inflation is highly dependent on domestic weather conditions as well as global developments.
In the medium term, there is a significant chance of a downward correction in unprocessed food inflation, especially given the base effect created by the last two year’s elevated food prices.
On the other hand, it is also possible that global developments and increasing demand for certain food items may push the food prices up further.
Therefore, food prices continue to pose risks to the inflation outlook on both sides.
Accordingly, monetary policy decisions in the forthcoming period will be largely dependent on new data and developments.
The Committee will closely monitor the lagged impacts on the wage and price-setting behavior of the recent rate cuts, the second round effects of elevated food and energy prices, and developments in incomes policy.
The timing of further easing will depend on incoming information regarding global liquidity conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
So far, Turkish economy has been resilient to reappraisal of risks in global financial markets.
The support from fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical in shielding the economy against possible further deterioration in global sentiment.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the economic program remain crucial.
In particular, advances in structural reforms enhancing quality of fiscal discipline and raising productivity are monitored closely by the CBT with regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices rose by 0.80 percent in January, bringing annual inflation to 8.17 percent.
Despite sharp price hikes in energy items such as electricity and natural gas, the partial correction in unprocessed food prices and the decelerating services inflation pulled the headline inflation down in January.
Although unprocessed food prices were up by 2.96 percent in January, the base effect from the dramatic upsurge during the same period last year brought the group’s annual inflation rate down to 5 percent.
Processed food inflation, on the other hand, continued to rise on the back of increasing worldwide wheat and grain prices, reaching 13.36 percent per annum.
The annual growth rate in energy prices rose by 16.26 percent in January mainly owing to sizable hikes in electricity and natural gas tariffs.
Electricity prices increased by 19.19 percent and natural gas prices went up by 8.04 percent, which in total added by 0.56 points to January inflation.
Fuel prices, another energy item, remained almost unchanged during the month.
The annual rate of inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food remained unchanged from December.
Deeper discounts in clothing and footwear items during January compared to earlier years lowered the group’s year-on-year inflation to 2 percent.
Prices of durables (excluding gold) rose by 1.03 percent in response to higher furniture prices, reversing the downward trend in durables good inflation since June 2007.
Gold prices were up by 8.75 percent.
Annual services inflation moderated despite the marked rise in transportation rates.
In January, The VAT cut had a smaller effect on catering and accommodation prices, but public dormitory fees classified under this group went up significantly.
Rent inflation, on the other hand, has continued to decelerate and yielded an annual decline of 5 percentage points over the past twelve months.
Disinflation in services is expected to continue in the upcoming period.
Committee (the Committee) underlined that unfavorable weather conditions may lead to a significant rise in unprocessed food prices in February compared with the same period in 2007, possibly leading to a temporary upward shift in annual inflation.
Inflation excluding food and energy items is expected to remain close to 4 percent.
Recent readings suggest that the economy continues to grow at a moderate pace.
Industrial production grew by 5 percent in annual terms during the last quarter of 2007.
Also, quarter on quarter growth rate was significantly positive in seasonally adjusted terms.
Industrial production declined annually in December 2007, as there were fewer working days compared to the previous year due to the religious holiday.
The January capacity utilization rates and production expectations of the industrial sector along with the low base effect of the same period of the previous year, suggest that industrial production in January may display a sizeable growth on annual basis.
For a better evaluation of the main trend in the manufacturing industry, December and January data should be read together.
Taking this into account, the Committee assessed that industrial production continues to grow modestly.
The strong Turkish lira fosters the demand for imported goods.
As a matter of fact, the quantity of consumer good imports, particularly automobiles and durables, rose sharply during the last quarter of 2007 compared to the same period of the previous year.
Also domestic sales of automobiles displayed a quite significant rise, in both annual and quarterly terms, during October- December period.
Even though automobile sales in January were down from December, they still increased by 37.7 percent in annual terms.
Although the relative price effect stimulates demand in industries like consumer durables, the weakened global credit conditions restrain the overall domestic demand.
In fact, consumer loans, which displayed some acceleration in the second half of 2007, settled back into a pattern of mild growth following the turmoil in mature markets.
Moreover, according to the Consumer Tendency Survey, household spending on automobiles, durables and semi- durables is on the decline.
Machinery-equipment production, a key indicator of investment activities, fell 4.4 percent in annual terms in the fourth quarter of 2007 but was up from the previous quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
During the same period, electrical machinery production increased by 23.3 percent annually, backed by vigorous export growth.
Domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles displayed sharp rises in January on a monthly and yearly basis.
The Committee noted that the recent rise in domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles did not point to a overheating when the significant slowdown in the past two years is taken into account.
Imports of capital goods increased both annually and quarterly.
Notwithstanding the relative price effect driven by the strong currency, uncertainties in global markets are expected to restrain investment demand in the forthcoming period.
The fact that nonmetallic mineral manufacturing has been contributing less to industrial production since 2005 confirms the slowdown in the construction sector.
In January, the rate of capacity utilization in this industry declined in annual terms.
Besides, the diffusion index based on “consumers’ intention to buy or build a house during the next twelve months” from the Consumer Tendency Survey, continues to trend downward, which suggests that the construction industry might weaken further in the upcoming period.
External demand does not display a significant deceleration at this point.
The export quantity index rose by 7.1 percent during October-December 2007 compared to a year earlier.
According to the records of Turkish Exporters Assembly, annual export growth amounted to 49.3 percent in January in US dollars, and exports will expand further in February.
Yet, the low base effect from the previous year should be taken into account in reading these figures.
Excluding seasonal patterns and price movements, the real export growth remains modest.
Yet, the expected slowdown in global economic activity may lead to a reduction in the contribution of external demand to economic growth in the medium term.
Overall, assessments on broad economic activity suggest that aggregate demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.
Uncertainties regarding the developments in mature markets restrain the recovery in domestic demand.
In fact, consumer confidence indices display a downward trend since September.
Recently, medium and long term loan rates have been following a flat course despite the policy rate cuts, suggesting that ongoing difficulties in the global credit markets partly offset the impact of monetary easing on the credit supply.
Monetary conditions continue to support disinflation.
The modest growth rate of the monetary indicators point to a similar picture.
The currency remains strong, curbing inflationary pressures and easing the impact of rising commodity prices on domestic production costs.
The recent upward movement in medium to long term interest rate can be explained by an increase in the risk premium rather than the deterioration in inflation expectations.
As a matter of fact, survey based inflation expectations series show no indication of worsening in inflation expectations.
Considering the size and the duration of ongoing supply-side shocks, the Committee has been citing the core indicators frequently.
Although its highest priority is price stability, the CBT, in line with its medium term approach, will not react aggressively to the shocks beyond the control of monetary policy, as doing so could create undesirable fluctuations in economic activity and distortions in relative prices.
In this context, the period in which inflation reaches to the target will depend on the course of food and energy prices.
to the inflation outlook can be summarized as follows: 19.
Inflation expectations were not affected by the energy price hikes in January, possibly indicating that inflation targets continue to serve as an anchor for expectations.
Yet, the main risk factor for the current medium term inflation outlook is a potential second round effect of the accumulated supply shocks, which may also create a higher than expected inflation inertia.
The course of agricultural commodity prices, oil prices and the rigidity in medium term inflation expectations has been feeding these risks.
Although the Committee has taken these factors into account in January Inflation Report, the risks originating from a potential second round impact of elevated food and energy prices should not be overlooked.
Therefore, the Committee will keep a close eye on the price setting behavior along with various core inflation measures.
The policy strategy will be to tolerate the first-round impact on inflation resulting from food and energy prices, yet to remain responsive to the second round effects.
The difficulties in the mature markets continue, despite the measures taken by the central banks.
Although there is an increasing consensus that the world economy will slow down, there is still considerable uncertainty regarding the degree and extent of the slowdown.
While the possibility of a sharper than envisaged slowdown in global economic activity, through a portfolio shock and its potential impact on the exchange rates, may constitute an upside risk for the short-term inflation outlook, it also poses downside risks for inflation in the medium term through a possible weakening in external and domestic demand.
Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy during an episode of worsening risk appetite is of utmost importance.
The Committee underlines that oil and food prices affect inflation all over the world, and Turkey has been one of the rare countries managing to deliver a significant decline in inflation in 2007.
Although unprocessed food prices may display temporary fluctuations, inflation excluding energy and food items is expected to remain close to 4 percent.
Yet, ongoing uncertainties in the global economy and the risks to the price setting behavior compel the CBT to be attentive to the incoming information.
Accordingly, the Committee will closely monitor the lagged impacts of the recent rate cuts.
Besides, the second round effects on the wage and price setting behavior of elevated food and energy prices and of the developments in incomes policy will be watched closely.
The timing of further easing will depend on developments regarding global market conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
However, the support from fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical in preserving the resilience of the economy against possible further deterioration in global sentiment.
In particular, advances in structural reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance the productivity, are monitored closely by the CBT with regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices rose by 1.29 percent in February, bringing annual inflation to 9.10 percent.
The rise in annual inflation was mainly driven by the sharp increase in unprocessed food prices, as highlighted in our previous Summary of the .
The annual CPI inflation excluding unprocessed food remained unchanged from the preceding month.
In February, food prices were up by 5.05 percent, recording the highest monthly increase since the introduction of the 2003-base-year index.
Fresh vegetable prices displayed an unusual rise due to adverse weather conditions.
On the other hand, the high rate of increase in February also brings about the possibility of a correction in vegetable prices in March.
Processed food inflation also remained on an upward trend.
Bread and cereal prices have continued to increase in response to elevated domestic and global wheat prices.
Moreover, higher import prices for food manufacturing industries put upward pressure on processed food prices through both intermediate goods and imported final consumer goods.
Therefore, prices of processed food other than bread and cereal have also shown high rates of increase.
Accordingly, the course of processed food prices remains as a risk, as it was highlighted in the January Inflation Report.
Energy prices increased by 0.30 percent in February, raising this group’s annual inflation rate to 16.35 percent.
Prices of domestic fuel products went up by 0.83 percent along with rising world oil prices, while prices of energy- related housing utilities remained almost unchanged.
The current elevation of oil prices not only poses a threat to domestic fuel prices, but also puts upward pressure on prices of energy-related housing utilities.
The energy prices in CPI are expected to rise further in March.
The year-on-year increase in prices of goods excluding energy and unprocessed food has been flat for the third consecutive month.
In terms of the sub-groups, clothing and footwear inflation continued to decelerate in annual terms.
The annual inflation in consumer durables was slightly down in January.
Gold prices, on the other hand, continued to add pressure on headline inflation.
Services inflation continues to decelerate.
The annual rate of increase in rents moderated further in February to 15 percent.
The steady decline in rent inflation for the past ten months is considered to be a favorable development by the .
Yet, price hikes in catering and transport services due to soaring food and energy prices curbed the downtrend in services inflation.
Against this background, the Committee assesses that rising global uncertainty and the adverse developments in food and energy prices may lead to some delay in reaching the inflation target.
Moreover, it should be noted that last year’s base effect may lead to an upward trend in annual core inflation indicators, starting from the second quarter of the year.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate for January-September 2007 is revised upwards to 5 percent from 3.8 percent, due to the new methodology employed by the TURKSTAT.
The revision did not bring a major change for the main trends in the GDP growth.
The average quarterly GDP growth rate, which was 2.2 percent between 2003Q3-2006Q2, has become 0.8 percent in the 2006Q3-2007Q3 period following the strong monetary tightening.
Current indicators suggest that the output continues to grow at a moderate pace.
Industrial production in January increased by 11.7 percent annually, consistent with the assessment of the Committee in the February meeting.
When corrected for the the number of working days, annual rate of growth in the industrial production drops to 5.2 percent, pointing to a considerable base effect.
Seasonally adjusted industrial production in January is higher than the December figures, yet still below the levels recorded in October and November.
February export figures and other leading indicators suggest that industrial production continues to grow, albeit at a moderating pace.
Domestic automobiles sales, one of the key indicators for consumer demand, has shown high growth rates in annual terms during the first two months of the year, but remained well below the levels recorded in the last quarter of 2007 in seasonally adjusted terms.
Domestic sales of white goods in January 2008 fell by 18.9 percent in annual terms.
After adjusting for seasonality, white goods sales fell significantly from the previous month, and have been lower than the 2007-fourth quarter levels.
Similarly, the monthly average of the seasonally adjusted CNBC-e Consumption Index for January-February period was also below the level observed in the previous quarter.
Moreover, according to CBT’s Consumer Tendency Survey, spending on automobiles, houses, durables and semi-durables remained low.
Consumer confidence indices have been declining since September.
Consumer credits have continued to moderate during the first quarter of 2008, due to uncertainties in global credit markets.
On the other hand, imports of consumer goods continued to accelerate in January both in annual and monthly terms.
However, the tightening in credit conditions and the recent developments in exchange rates are likely to curb import growth.
Investment spending has continued to slow down.
The growth rate of private machinery-equipment investments was revised downward for the first nine months of 2007.
The revision revealed that machinery-equipment growth rate in investments was declining during this period.
Recent machinery-equipment production figures indicate that investments remain on a downward track.
Seasonally adjusted machinery-equipment production, which had decreased on a quarterly basis starting from the second quarter of 2007, declined both in annual and quarterly terms in January.
Electrical machinery production also went down in January in seasonally adjusted terms.
Imports of capital goods, on the other hand, continued to rise sharply in January both on a yearly and monthly basis.
Despite the rebound in January-February period, sales of heavy commercial vehicles are still below the levels recorded during the times of vigorous domestic demand.
Non-metallic mineral production, which is among key indicators of construction activity, remained unchanged in 2007 in annual terms.
Seasonally adjusted figure for January 2008 was below the average level of the previous quarter.
The turmoil in global financial markets and its likely impact on the domestic economy signal that the slowdown in the construction industry may continue.
CBT’s Consumer Tendency Survey data on “consumers’ likeliness to buy or build a house during the next twelve months” support this outlook.
Deterioration in the overall investment sentiment is also evident in the results of Istanbul Chamber of Industry’s (ICI) Economic .
Survey for the second half of 2007.
Accordingly, corporate profitability fell substantially in annual terms.
While the number of firms making new investments fell partly due to decreases in profitability, we observe an increase in firms’ tendency to invest abroad.
External demand maintained its steady growth during the first quarter.
According to data from Turkish Exporters’ Assembly, annual export growth measured in US dollars amounted to 40.7 percent in February, and leading indicators for March also suggest a strong export growth in nominal terms.
Since exports are growing largely due to movements in the terms of trade, the quantity indexes could provide a better indicator for the underlying trends in exports.
In that sense, the robust growth in seasonally adjusted quantity indexes during January reveal that exports remain strong.
The slowdown in the economic activity is also evident in the non-farm employment data for the fourth quarter of 2007.
The fourth-quarter non-farm employment remained unchanged from a year earlier, whereas non-farm unemployment rate rose by 0.4 percentage points annually and reached 12.6 percent.
Seasonally adjusted non-farm unemployment, on the other hand, declined for the first time since the second quarter of 2003.
In conclusion, although the readings related to the first couple of months of 2008 indicate an ongoing but moderating growth, deepening problems in international credit markets have increased the downside risks.
Increased volatility in financial markets and tightened credit conditions are likely to restrain the domestic demand in the forthcoming period.
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that aggregate demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.
Recent rise in the market interest rates can mostly be attributed to the reflections of global risks on the domestic environment.
Movements in exchange rates resulting from the financial market volatility may have adverse effects on inflation in the short term.
On the other hand, given the weak demand conditions, exchange rate pass-through should be relatively limited at this point.
Notwithstanding the moderation in domestic demand, some risks remain for the inflation outlook: 20.
Recent research conducted by the staff of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) suggests that economic agents lately have been attaching more weight to past inflation in forming their expectations.
This observation implies that accumulated impact of the hikes in food and energy prices not only puts delay on the disinflation process but also impedes the improvement in inflation expectations.
Besides, the movements in exchange rates and the heightened risk aversion may have further adverse impact on inflation expectations.
Deterioration in inflation expectations has increased the uncertainty regarding the second round effects of the supply side shocks, thereby highlighting the risks of higher-than-envisaged inertia in inflation dynamics.
Yet, medium term inflation expectations still point to a declining inflation trend, indicating that inflation targets, to some extent, continue to serve as a medium term anchor.
The Committee will continue to monitor the main trends in inflation expectations closely.
Uncertainties in the global economy pose risks to the inflation outlook through possible portfolio effects and thus movements in exchange rates.
The difficulties in the money and capital markets of the developed economies continue, despite the relevant measures taken by the central banks.
This process also affects the domestic markets.
The CBT monitors the developments in financial markets with caution.
Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy is of utmost importance under current circumstances.
Moreover, we assume that any extra need to readjust the primary budget balance will be implemented through expenditure cuts rather than hikes in indirect taxes.
The Committee assessed that rising global uncertainty and the adverse developments in food and energy prices might lead to some delay in reaching the inflation target.
Monetary policy remains focused on attaining the 4 percent inflation target in the medium term.
However, reacting aggressively to supply- side shocks would lead to undesired fluctuations in the output.
Therefore, current conditions necessitate the need to remain flexible.
In that sense, the period inflation reaches the target may vary depending on the developments in commodity and financial markets.
In sum, ongoing uncertainties in the global economy and the risks to the price setting behavior have increased the need for the monetary policy to be more cautious.
The Committee will continue to closely monitor the second round effects of the elevated food and energy prices.
Monetary policy remains restrictive even after the recent rate cuts.
Future rate cuts will depend on developments regarding global market conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
The support from fiscal policy and structural reforms are critical in preserving the resilience of the economy under current conditions.
Consumer prices rose by 0.96 percent in March, pushing annual inflation up to 9.15 percent.
Inflation went up primarily due to soaring processed food prices and exchange rate movements, breaching the upper bound of the uncertainty band in March.
The processed food prices continued to rise sharply during the first quarter of 2008.
In March, processed food prices rose by a dramatic 2.86 percent, lifting annual inflation in processed food to 16.63 percent.
Annual rate of increase in bread and grain prices reached 20.14 percent.
Overall, processed food prices have remained elevated, further aggravating the pressures on food inflation.
Energy prices were up 0.98 percent in March.
The steep increase in crude oil prices and the weakening of the Turkish lira drove fuel prices higher in March, portending a further rise in April.
Moreover, elevated oil prices have added to the pressures on the prices of energy utilities in housing.
Inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food edged up slightly in March after having flattened out during the past three months, as clothing and footwear prices increased by 1.80 percent, which is above the seasonal average.
The recent depreciation of the Turkish lira had a limited effect on prices of durables in March.
Yet, the lagged effects of exchange rate movements are likely to put pressure on consumer durables in April.
Although rental inflation has decelerated further, the continued rise in energy and food prices has driven prices for transport and catering services higher, causing the annual services inflation to edge up by around 0.5 basis points to 8.93 percent in March.
Annual inflation in other sub-categories of services also displayed a rise.
Committee (the Committee) noted that inflation may temporarily rise in the second and third quarters due to rising oil prices, lagged exchange rate pass-through and unfavorable base effects, before starting to fall again in the final quarter.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 3.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2007 in annual terms, resulting in a GDP growth of 4.5 percent for the whole year.
Private consumption and investment made the greatest contribution to the fourth- quarter GDP growth.
Government spending, on the other hand, provided a limited contribution.
Besides, the contribution of net external demand was negative at 3.7 percentage points.
The Committee noted that the demand for domestic goods and services remained low during this period, as local residents had increased their demand for imported goods for their relative price advantage.
In fact, the fourth- quarter GDP growth falls to 0.2 percent if stock changes are excluded.
In seasonally adjusted terms, GDP displayed a 2.1 percent quarterly growth in the last quarter of 2001.
Yet, the Committee stated, in consideration of global uncertainties surrounding the current economic climate, that this growth provides only a partial insight into the upcoming period.
Indeed, industrial production during January-February remained unchanged from the previous quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis, indicating that economic activity has continued to moderate.
Indicators for consumer demand confirm the slowdown in domestic demand.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the first-quarter CNBC-e consumption index remained unchanged on a quarterly basis, whereas the import quantity index for consumer goods was slightly down from the preceding quarter.
In the meantime, domestic sales of automobiles were markedly up in annual terms on the back of a low base effect, but were significantly lower than the figures recorded a quarter earlier.
Domestic sales of white goods have declined both on a quarterly and annual basis during January-February.
The Committee noted that seasonally adjusted sales of white goods have fallen below the range between 400,000 to 450,000 units, their lowest level since the first quarter of 2004.
Moreover, the CNBC-e and CBT consumer confidence indices have been on the fall since September, when global risks became more apparent.
In fact, after a rebound during the first half of 2007, the growth of consumer loans has slowed down for the second consecutive quarter.
The Committee assessed that the global credit crunch has recently continued to hold down consumer loans.
The fourth-quarter rebound in private sector’s machinery-equipment investment is expected to be short-lived.
Indicators for the first quarter of 2008 suggest that the investment demand for imported goods is still robust, while the production of domestic capital goods has slowed from the previous quarter.
Imports of capital goods, which saw a dramatic annual growth of 34.3 percent during January-February, point to a quarterly acceleration as well.
However, the slowdown in machinery-equipment production for the past one year continued into the first two months of 2008, resulting in an annual decrease of 6.2 percent.
Besides, electrical machinery production and domestic sales of light commercial vehicles increased annually at a fairly strong rate, but declined quarterly in seasonally adjusted terms.
Sales of heavy commercial vehicles have remained low since the monetary tightening and narrowed slightly on a quarterly basis in response to the slump in March.
In sum, available production, import and sales data suggest that machinery-equipment investments will slow down in the first quarter of 2008, but will remain above their year-ago level thanks to the base effect.
Construction investments have flattened out for the past one and a half years.
Residential construction permits declined in 2007 in annual terms.
Along with the downdraft in construction activity, production gains in housing-related industries have stalled.
The production of nonmetallic minerals, an intermediate input to construction activity, remained unchanged in 2007 from the previous year, while furniture manufacturing decreased by 13.8 percent.
The housing sector will continue to be restrained by rising precautionary savings and tighter credit conditions due to global uncertainties.
In sum, recent readings on the private demand for consumption and investment have slowed down.
The labor market also suggests a similar outlook.
In seasonally adjusted terms, non-farm employment increased by a quarterly 0.1 percent on average during 2007, after having risen at a steady quarterly average of 1.1 percent from 2001 to end-2006.
The contribution of net exports to GDP growth turned negative in the second half of 2007 mainly due to rising imported goods driven by lower relative prices.
Recent data indicate that the sizable annual growth in exports and imports has continued into the first quarter of 2008.
Thanks to the sharp increase in export quantity during January- February, growth in real exports was stronger than imports.
Given both the recent weakening of the Turkish lira and the slowdown in domestic demand, the rate of increase in import quantity will likely begin to decelerate in the second quarter and net exports will make an increased contribution to growth.
Yet, the possibility that international prices of oil and other commodities might increase further continues to pose a risk to the foreign trade deficit.
According to export data released by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly for March and April and “expectations for export orders for the next three months” from CBT’s Business Tendency Survey, exports will continue to grow sharply in the second quarter of 2008.
Although the more pronounced downside risks to the growth of advanced economies might put pressure on the export performance, the increased weight of exports to countries other than EU and the US during the past few months can partially offset that risk.
In sum, deepening problems in international credit markets continue to restrain the domestic demand, while external demand remains strong.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation.
After growing modestly in the second and third quarters of 2007, labor productivity in the manufacturing industry posted a recovery thanks to the relatively strong fourth- quarter production.
In this sense, unit labor costs fell on an annual basis and continued to support disinflation, though at a lesser extent.
The Committee emphasized the need to implement measures to improve the investment climate and to foster productivity, which would support price stability in the medium term.
Rising food and energy prices and ongoing uncertainties in the global economy have worsened inflation expectations and increased the upside risks on inflation.
Accordingly, monetary policy adopted a tightening bias.
The members also assessed the revisions in forecasts to be published in the Inflation Report.
The Committee pointed that food and energy prices may continue to rise due to structural factors and this should be taken into account while revising the forecasts.
Consequently, assuming a continued rise in food and energy prices and incorporating recent exchange rate movements have led to a significant upside revision in the inflation forecasts.
The Committee assessed that bringing inflation back to 4 percent by the end of 2009 would require offsetting the first round effects of the likely supply shocks that are expected to continue during 2008-09, and thus create undesired fluctuations in the economic activity and relative prices.
In fact, revised projections suggest that, converging to the medium term target of 4 percent may extend beyond two years, even when tight monetary policy is maintained for an extended period.
Since inflation is seen above the medium term target for a considerable period, the meeting agenda also covered the issue of target revision.
Committee members indicated that changing the target for end-2008 would not be appropriate, since doing so would be a clear violation of the accountability principle in practice.
Regarding targets for 2009 and afterwards, the Committee assessed that, given the uncertainty surrounding the food and energy prices as well as the global economy, it would be wiser to reconsider the issue towards the end of this year in tandem with the budget preparations.
Accordingly, we envisage a framework in which forecasts serve as intermediate anchors while the medium term is anchored by the 4 percent target.
The Committee therefore noted that extending the forecast horizon in the Inflation Report to three years would enhance the efficiency of the overall strategy of monetary policy.
In light of these considerations, we expect inflation to reach 4 percent in three years.
Extending the horizon within which inflation converges to the target does not mean that monetary policy will be looser in the forthcoming period.
On the contrary, the Committee will be more responsive to bad news than good news and will consider a measured tightening when needed.
The Committee indicated that the revised forecasts, which are based on quite conservative assumptions--especially on food and energy prices, imply that downside risks are as significant as upside risks.
Considering the significant role of supply shocks under current conditions, it was noted that providing projections under alternative scenarios for food and energy prices would be beneficial for the communication of monetary policy.
The Committee also assessed that materialization of upside risks would require further tightening of the monetary policy stance, while downward surprises in food and energy prices would be perceived as an opportunity to bring inflation back to target in a shorter period.
A protracted period of rising food and energy prices have led to a significant overshooting of the inflation targets since the adoption of the inflation targeting regime and consequently increased the stickiness in inflation expectations, as economic agents have become more backward looking.
Under normal conditions, supply shocks are expected to alter relative prices rather than the underlying inflation trend.
Nevertheless, the fact that several long-lasting shocks appeared concurrently has increased the risks to the price setting behavior.
This view is also supported by a recent study by the CBT staff, which suggests that recently economic agents have been attaching more weight to past inflation in forming their expectations.
Overall, it may be necessary to pursue a tighter monetary policy should the price setting behavior continue to deteriorate.
Another major risk to the inflation outlook is a sharper than expected slowdown in the global economic activity, which, in turn, could lead to further volatility in financial markets.
The eventual impact of the financial turmoil on the global economic activity is yet to be seen.
These uncertainties have been dampening the risk appetite and thus slowing the capital flows to emerging economies.
The CBT will not react to temporary fluctuations in financial markets.
Yet, we will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy in case of a significant worsening in the overall pricing behavior.
The Committee underscored that current liquidity conditions provide the CBT with a flexible tool to engineer a rapid monetary tightening when needed.
The excess liquidity in the money market has been shrinking during the past few months, due to factors such as reduced daily minimum amount in reserve purchase auctions, relatively low rollover ratio of the FX debt by the Treasury, and rising money demand.
This trend is expected to prevail in the forthcoming period, possibly leading to a tightening in monetary conditions.
The Committee therefore noted that this framework provides the CBT with a flexible and efficient tool, which makes it possible to implement a monetary tightening without conducting a formal MPC meeting.
Finally, the Committee underscored that the medium-term inflation projections assume no further increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except those required by the automatic pricing mechanism.
In particular, this means that any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would occur largely through expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes.
Any deviation from this framework may have an effect on the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
In sum, the Committee assessed that preventing the potential second-round effects of the recent deterioration in inflation expectations might require maintaining a tight monetary policy for a considerable period.
Future monetary policy decisions will depend on developments regarding global market conditions, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
Prudent monetary policy is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for attaining price stability.
The support from fiscal policy and structural reforms are also critical in this respect.
Sound fiscal policy has been one of the main factors in driving inflation down to single digits.
The role of fiscal policy will continue to be critical in the road to price stability.
Preserving the resilience of the economy, especially under current conditions, requires the continuation of fiscal discipline and structural reforms.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms envisaged in the economic program remain to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices were up 1.68 percent in April and annual inflation rose to 9.66 percent.
The rise in inflation was largely driven by increases in food and oil prices and lagged effects of exchange rate movements.
The surge in food and energy prices accounted for about 6.3 percent of the annual inflation rate by April.
The unprocessed food inflation slowed to an annualized rate of 6.73 percent on the back of a partial correction, driven by improved weather conditions.
In contrast, processed food prices continued to rise at a strong pace, with an annual rate of increase of more than 20 percent in April.
Annual inflation in processed food prices is expected to remain at elevated levels for a while.
Energy prices rose by 1.54 percent in April to an annual rate of 17.49 percent.
The surge in world oil prices and the depreciation of the Turkish lira pushed fuel oil prices higher by 4 percent in April.
Fuel oil prices are expected to further increase in May.
The surge in international oil prices also puts upward pressure on natural gas and electricity prices.
The potential hikes in electricity tariffs implied by the automatic price adjustment mechanism creates short term upside risks on domestic energy prices.
Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food increased by 1.6 percentage points to 8.55 percent, driven primarily by soaring processed food prices coupled with exchange rate pass-through to domestic inflation.
The lagged effects of exchange rate developments are predicted to put further pressure in May on the consumer prices, especially through durable goods.
The steep rise in food and energy has been having adverse effects also on services inflation.
Catering prices rose by 1.86 percent and prices for transport services were up 1.72 percent, recording an annual rate of increase of 13.03 and 11.44 percent, respectively.
Prices for services other than catering and transport, however, maintain a slower rate of increase.
Committee (The Committee) noted that inflation will remain elevated in the short term owing to lagged pass-through from exchange rates and supply shocks, yet it will start decelerating by the last quarter of 2008. .
Recent readings are in line with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
Industrial production grew at an annualized rate of 2.4 percent in March, but was down 1.7 percent from February on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Based on quarterly averages, industrial production increased by a solid 6.9 percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2008, but fell by 0.7 percent from the previous quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
On balance, these figures indicate that, despite the recent slowdown in economic activity, the economy will display a relatively sizeable annual growth in the first quarter of 2008, mainly benefiting from the base effect.
Indicators for consumer demand point to an ongoing slowdown in domestic demand.
The seasonally adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continued to trend downward in April, following the decline in the first quarter.
Consumer confidence indices and seasonally adjusted sales of automobiles continued to decline in April.
Moreover, first- quarter domestic sales of white goods lagged behind the fourth quarter of 2007 on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Leading indicators for private sector investments reflect a similar outlook to consumer demand.
The production of electrical machinery and appliances and the domestic sales of light commercial vehicles registered a strong annual growth rate during the first quarter; however, both indicators were down from a quarter ago in seasonally adjusted terms.
Machinery-equipment production, on the other hand, declined both on annual and seasonally adjusted terms.
Imports of capital goods remain strong on a year-on-year basis, yet seasonally adjusted figures point to a slowdown.
Besides, the production of nonmetallic minerals continues to fall, suggesting further weakening in construction activity.
The economic slowdown is also evident in service-sector employment figures, which displayed a limited rise in the first quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
Both exports and imports recorded high growth rates in the first quarter of 2008.
During this period, exports grew faster than imports in real terms.
Leading data released by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly suggest that exports have continued to grow at a robust pace in April and May.
In sum, difficulties in international credit markets continue to restrain domestic demand, while external demand remains robust.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.
Moderating domestic demand has been curbing the pass through from cost-push factors.
The prices of products that do not use food or energy as main inputs have been rather well behaved.
However, the fact that first round effects of the supply side shocks have reached unprecedented levels has been affecting inflation expectations adversely.
In this regard, the Committee decided to implement a measured hike in policy rates to contain the potential second round effects.
Inflation is expected to start decelerating in the last quarter of the year, ending 2009 at around 6.7 percent, as forecasted in the April Inflation Report.
In the forthcoming period, monetary policy decisions will be geared towards keeping inflation close to these forecasts.
In this respect, the Committee highlighted the importance of economic agents’ forecasts to be aligned with the Central Bank forecasts.
to the inflation outlook exist on both sides: 16.
Continued rises in energy prices and ongoing uncertainty in the global economy have increased the risks on the short-term inflation outlook.
The Committee indicated that oil prices have materialized at higher levels than the path implied by our baseline projections in the April Inflation Report.
Developments in food prices, on the other hand, have been relatively more favorable.
Although processed food prices continued to rise due to lagged impact of past developments, they are likely to decelerate on the back of recent moderation in agricultural commodity prices.
Moreover, inflation in unprocessed food items has been easing recently, mainly owing to benign weather conditions.
Overall, the Committee assessed that at this point there is no need to alter the main scenario on food prices presented in the Inflation Report.
The fact that the economy has faced persistent and sizeable supply shocks, concurrently with deterioration in overall market sentiment, implies that inflation may display more inertia than envisaged.
In this respect, the uncertainty in food and energy prices also poses risks for the medium term outlook.
The Central Bank will aim at containing the second round effects should the food and energy prices continue to rise at a rapid pace.
More favorable developments than envisaged, on the other hand, will be perceived as an opportunity to implement a faster disinflation.
The extent of the slowdown in the global economy is yet to be seen and the volatility in the financial markets still continues to be a major source of uncertainty.
A protracted period of uncertainty has been keeping risk appetite at low levels and leading to a slowdown in capital flows to emerging markets.
The Committee once again emphasized that monetary policy would not react to temporary fluctuations in financial markets, but will not hesitate to implement the necessary monetary tightening should the volatility in the financial markets translate into a generalized deterioration in the pricing behavior.
The Committee also underlined that existing conditions in the money market allow the Central Bank to implement an effective liquidity management.
The Committee underscored that it would be more beneficial if any need to tighten the fiscal balance, in order to meet the targets implied by the Medium Term Financial Framework, would in principle be implemented largely through expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes.
Moreover, it was stated that pre-announcing a schedule or a rule regarding the likely adjustments in administered prices and taxes would help to alleviate the level of dispersion in inflation expectations.
In sum, the Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to prevent the potential second-round effects of the adverse developments in food and energy prices.
Accordingly, the Committee will consider the possibility of a further measured rate hike in the next meeting.
The Committee emphasized that the policy stance presented in the Inflation Report should by no means perceived as a commitment, as any new data or information related to the inflation outlook might lead a revision in the monetary policy stance.
Consequently, the Committee stated that the extent and timing of possible future rate hike would depend on developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not a sufficient condition for attaining price stability.
In this respect, the European Union accession process and the implementation of structural reforms remain to be of utmost importance.
In particular, advances in structural reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance the productivity, are monitored closely with regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices increased by 1.49 percent in May and annual inflation rose to 10.74 percent.
The rise in food and energy prices continued to be the major driver of inflation, accounting for about 7 percentage points of annual inflation as of May.
The year-on-year rate of increase in food and nonalcoholic beverages surged to an all-time high of 15.69 percent since the inception of the new consumer index in 2003.
Even though fresh fruit and vegetable prices displayed some correction, inflation in other unprocessed food prices continued to rise, driving up annual inflation in overall unprocessed food to 8.26 percent in May.
Yet, a further correction in fresh fruit and vegetable prices is likely to be observed in June as well.
Meanwhile, the processed food prices continued to accelerate in May, pushing the group’s annual inflation as high as 22.83 percent.
Sub-groups, particularly bread and grain prices and prices for oils and fats, continued to increase markedly.
The annual inflation in processed food prices is expected to remain elevated for some time.
Energy prices were up 0.77 percent in May to an annual rate of 17.70 percent, as fuel prices rose by 2.58 percent due to record-high world oil prices.
Domestic energy prices are likely to continue increasing in the short term on the back of the adoption of automatic price adjustment mechanism in setting electricity tariffs.
Inflation in goods excluding energy and unprocessed food increased by 1.35 percentage points to an annual rate of 9.90 percent in May, of which 7.40 percentage points can be explained by the rise in processed food prices.
The impact of higher food and energy prices on services inflation continued into May.
Prices for catering and transport services have shown a monthly increase of 1.82 and 1.79 percent, respectively, which together accounted for almost half of the annual services inflation rate of 9.86 percent.
Committee (the Committee) noted that prices for services other than catering and transport remained relatively flat, and that the annual rental inflation registered a decline of 6 points over the past one year.
Core inflation indicators have continued to rise due to first and second round effects of the ongoing supply shocks.
The Committee stated that inflation is expected to decelerate starting the final quarter of the year, although base effects are likely to keep annual inflation at elevated levels in the short term.
Data available for the first half of the year suggest an ongoing moderation in the economic activity.
During the first four months, industrial production was nearly unchanged from the last quarter in 2007 on a seasonally adjusted basis.
The global credit crunch continues to restrain domestic demand.
The seasonally adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continued to decline during April and May.
Domestic sales of automobiles and white goods and imports of consumer goods also indicate a similar picture.
The Committee emphasized that the chemical production, which is sensitive to changes in domestic demand, fell significantly in both monthly and annual terms between March and April.
Moreover, imports of consumer goods were down from the first-quarter average in April in seasonally adjusted terms.
The CNBC-e consumer confidence index, which has been falling since the last quarter of 2007, also remained weak in May.
Moreover, recent data indicate that real consumer loans further moderated in April and May.
The Committee assessed that soaring food prices and ongoing uncertainties continue to curb the domestic demand.
Indicators from the Consumer Tendency Survey, especially on households’ willingness to purchase semi-durable and durable goods, lend support for this assessment.
Global and domestic uncertainties have been slowing down the investment demand.
The Committee noted that the number of newly established firms has dropped over the first half of 2008, indicating an ongoing moderation in business investment.
Despite the positive outlook for external demand, machinery-equipment production continued to flatten in April.
The decline in domestic sales of commercial vehicles during the first quarter accelerated in April and May, confirming the slowdown in investment demand.
Imports of capital goods, which displayed a slowdown in the first quarter, further continued to moderate in April on a seasonally adjusted basis.
After having remained flat in 2007 on the back of slowing construction activity, the production of nonmetallic minerals grew by an annual rate of 6.9 percent during January-April 2008, making a positive contribution to industrial production.
Although the first-quarter rise in construction employment suggests a rebound over the previous year, tightening credit conditions and ongoing uncertainties are expected to put more pressure on the housing market.
In fact, households’ willingness to purchase a new house has been declining, as suggested by the Consumer Tendency Survey.
Labor market conditions improved slightly during the first quarter, mainly driven by the manufacturing industry employment.
In contrast, the service-sector employment has slowed down further.
Accordingly, the Committee indicated that the recent trend in non-farm employment contain the unit labor costs and consumer demand.
External demand has remained relatively strong.
Seasonally adjusted figures indicate that external demand in April was stronger compared to the first-quarter average.
As suggested by the robust pace of exports and the marked slowdown in imports, net exports are expected to make a positive contribution to economic growth during the second quarter of the year.
In sum, recent readings on supply and demand conditions have been largely in line with the predictions of the April Inflation Report.
Accordingly, aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation.
The Committee reassessed the inflation outlook presented under three alternative scenarios in the April Inflation Report.
Recently there have been favorable developments in unprocessed food prices, while oil prices have followed a significantly higher course than the prices assumed in the baseline scenario in the April Inflation Report.
Consequently, inflation is expected to decelerate starting from the last quarter of the year, ending 2009 close to the 7.5 percent inflation target.
The Committee emphasized that tighter credit conditions and the weakening in consumer confidence have continued to moderate domestic demand, hence supporting disinflation.
Relatively moderate pace of inflation in services excluding transport and catering—items sensitive to food and energy price developments— support this view.
Nevertheless, persisting supply side shocks continue to delay disinflation, having adverse effects on inflation expectations.
In this respect, monetary tightening exercised in May and June should be perceived as an attempt to coordinate inflation expectations around the revised targets and thus to prevent the materialization of second round effects.
Adverse impacts of the supply side shocks on the economy will be more limited should the economic agents align their expectations for the next three years with the target rates of 7,5 percent, 6.5 percent and 5.5 percent, respectively.
The Committee also assessed the liquidity projections and the liquidity management strategy.
Excess liquidity sterilized in the overnight market has been shrinking in the second half of 2008 due to a reduction in the amount of FX purchased through regular auctions, fall in Treasury’s foreign debt rollover ratio, and rising money demand.
Accordingly, the Central Bank has provided the required liquidity into the system via repo auctions, targeting overnight interest rates to materialize at levels close to Central Bank borrowing rate.
Current projections do not point to a permanent shortage in liquidity.
Accordingly, overnight interest rate in the money market will be targeted to stay close to the Central Bank borrowing rate in the forthcoming period.
Hence, Central Bank’s overnight borrowing rate will continue to be the key policy rate.
Main risks to the inflation outlook can be listed as follows: 21.
Developments in oil prices continue to pose risks on inflation all over the world.
The automatic adjustment mechanism in electricity tariffs, to be launched soon, is likely to further increase the domestic energy prices.
Considering the ongoing uncertainties regarding energy prices, the Central Bank will continue to provide the inflation outlook under alternative scenarios.
The persistence of global inflationary pressures is yet to be seen and the impact of ongoing difficulties in the financial system on the overall economy still continues to be a major source of uncertainty.
A protracted period of global uncertainty has been keeping risk appetite at low levels and leading to a slowdown in capital flows to emerging markets.
In sum, the Committee stated that ongoing uncertainties and supply side shocks continued to pose risks on inflation, and that the Central Bank would consider a further measured rate hike when needed, so as to prevent the potential second-round effects of such risk factors.
Accordingly, upcoming data related to inflation outlook will be monitored carefully.
The extent and timing of a possible future rate hike will depend on developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
Consumer prices were down by 0.36 percent in June, bringing annual inflation down to 10.61 percent.
This development was mainly driven by the fall in the annual rate of increase in unprocessed food prices, notwithstanding ongoing rapid increases in processed food and energy prices.
The surge in food and energy prices accounts for 6.80 percentage points of annual inflation as of June.
Committee (the Committee) noted that unprocessed food prices have been relatively favorable in recent months with a decline of around 10 percent in June, which is a significant fall even if corrected for seasonal factors.
The decline can largely be attributed to fresh fruit and vegetable prices that dropped by a remarkable 21.69 percent due to reduced exports.
As a whole, the group’s annual inflation fell to 1.60 percent.
The Committee noted that the correction in unprocessed food prices might be partially reversed by the renewed exports to Russia in early July.
In contrast, processed food prices continued to increase, mainly due to a steep rise in bread and grain prices that hit a monthly rate of 4.11 percent in June.
Yet, inflation in processed food excluding bread and grains has displayed some moderation compared with the past four months.
The 2008 harvest is likely to produce better yields than last year, helping processed food inflation to moderate in the second half of the year.
Energy prices increased by 1.75 percent in June amid rising fuel and energy (natural gas) prices, pushing the group’s annual inflation up to 19.8 percent.
Energy prices are expected to rise further in July due to increased electricity rates.
New electricity tariff rates, which have been effective as of July 1, are likely to have a direct effect of about 0.5 points to CPI inflation.
Annual inflation in clothing and footwear moderated in June, while inflation in durable consumer goods increased.
Current demand and cost conditions in the clothing sector lead to a decline in relative price of clothing.
Moreover, the weakening of the Turkish lira between January and April continued to have lagged impacts on prices of durable goods, albeit to a lesser degree in June.
Annual services inflation remained flat in June.
The annual rate of increase in prices for catering and transport services remained elevated due to developments in food and energy prices.
On the other hand, annual inflation in services other than transport and catering have declined by 0.44 percentage points over the previous month.
Although second-round effects of rising oil and food prices, lagged impacts of exchange rate pass-through, and last year’s low base have led to an increase in core inflation indicators during the second quarter of the year, core inflation indicators registered a modest decline in June in seasonally adjusted terms.
Moreover, medium-term inflation expectations seem broadly contained in July, after having deteriorated over recent months.
The Committee also noted that the hikes in electricity rates and the last year’s low base would lead to a significant but temporary rise in annual inflation in July.
Recent readings on supply and demand conditions are in line with the outlook presented in our April Inflation Report.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the first quarter grew by 6.6 percent in annual terms.
Although annual percentage changes suggest a vigorous GDP growth, seasonally adjusted figures point to a quarterly growth rate of around 0.8 percent.
The year-on-year growth rate is largely driven by the low base effect from the same period last year.
The Committee thus emphasized that seasonally adjusted figures are key to a sound assessment of the main trends in economic activity.
Overall, seasonally adjusted figures suggest an ongoing but moderating economic activity.
On the expenditures front, GDP growth was mostly driven by private demand, whereas public expenditures had a limited contribution to growth.
Although total final domestic demand increased by 7.5 percent compared with a year earlier, it posted a quarterly decline in seasonally adjusted terms.
With exports having accelerated in recent months, the negative contribution of net external demand to growth has been smaller than the two preceding quarters.
Compared with a quarter ago, the contribution of domestic demand to growth has fallen while that of net foreign demand has picked up on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Recent indicators point to a further slowdown in consumer demand in the second quarter.
Consumer confidence indices were down from a quarter ago, while the slowdown in real consumer loans continued.
The seasonally adjusted CNBC-e consumption index continued to fall in the second quarter.
The production of chemicals also declined further.
Furniture manufacturing picked up in the second quarter, yet remained weaker than it was in periods of vigorous demand.
Domestic sales of automobiles displayed a significant fall during January-June period.
Imports of consumer goods also declined during the same period, particularly due to a dramatic decline in the demand for passenger cars.
Investment demand followed a similar pattern to consumer demand in recent months.
Domestic sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles were weaker compared to the previous quarter, while the production of machinery- equipment and electric machinery remained flat.
Imports of capital goods were down in quarterly terms during January-June on the back of a slump in transport vehicles.
Excluding those vehicles, imports of investment goods were still falling, albeit more modestly.
Despite a slight rebound in the first quarter of 2008, housing permits, which have been flat since early 2006, remained stable in the second quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
The total number of construction permits in the first quarter was down by 1 percent from a year ago.
The slowdown in the private construction sector is even more notable once the positive contribution from the public sector is excluded.
Moreover, the fact that production of nonmetallic minerals grow at a lower pace than the exports suggest that the domestic construction activity has continued to moderate.
External demand remained strong.
The export quantity index increased by 18.2 percent in the first quarter, and by 11.4 percent during April-May in annual terms.
Seasonally adjusted figures point to an ongoing yet slightly moderating growth in exports in real terms.
The robust pace of exports and the recent slowdown in imports suggest that the contribution of net exports will be higher in the second quarter compared to the previous quarter.
Although external demand remained robust, annual growth rate in industrial production moderated to 4.2 percent during April-May period.
Seasonally adjusted figures suggest that industrial production expanded at a subdued pace during the first quarter and grew moderately in the second quarter.
First quarter data on the labor market point to a modest recovery in aggregate terms, although employment in services continue to slow down.
During the March-May period, non-farm employment rose by 2.4 percent over a year ago, while non-farm unemployment fell by 0.1 points to 12.3 percent.
The Committee emphasized that current conditions in the labor market continue to restrain the unit labor costs and domestic demand.
Labor productivity indicators based on the value-added in the non-farm sector continued to rise in the first quarter, partially offsetting the cost-push factors imposed by surging world oil and commodity prices on the real marginal costs.
In sum, difficulties in international credit markets continue to restrain the domestic demand, while external demand remains relatively robust.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation .
The meeting agenda also included an assessment of the inflation forecasts and their underlying assumptions to appear in the July Inflation Report.
Despite the favorable developments in the unprocessed food inflation, processed food prices increased at a faster pace than anticipated.
Therefore, the Committee envisioned a slightly higher path for the food prices compared to the previous Report.
Considering that oil prices have been drifting at significantly higher levels than assumed in the previous Report, the Committee noted that the revised assumptions for oil prices should incorporate some room for caution.
Consequently, inflation forecasts, which incorporate the revised assumptions for oil and food prices, suggest that inflation will stay at high levels for a short period before gradually moderating towards the 7.5 percent target by the end of 2009.
The Committee underscored that, adverse impacts of the supply side shocks on the economy would be more limited should the economic agents align their expectations for the next three years with the target rates of 7.5 percent, 6.5 percent and 5.5 percent, respectively.
The revised inflation forecasts are based on quite conservative assumptions for food and energy prices, implying that downside risks on these factors are as significant as upside risks.
Should the upside risks materialize, monetary policy will be conducted so as to minimize upside deviations from the targets.
Downward surprises in food and energy prices, on the other hand, will be perceived as an opportunity to bring inflation back to target in a shorter period than envisaged in our baseline scenario.
Despite the expected decline in inflation in the medium term, uncertainties exist regarding the degree of inflation persistence.
Long-lasting supply shocks have been keeping headline inflation at elevated levels and thus increasing the risk of rising backward looking schemes in the wage and price setting behavior.
Although the widening output gap should contain the second round effects of the supply shocks, the exact pace of disinflation would still depend on the extent new inflation targets serve as a strong reference for economic agents.
Having this in mind, the CBT will continue to focus on enhancing the credibility of the new inflation targets.
In this context, developments in the general pricing behavior and the underlying inflation trends will be monitored closely.
International financial markets remain fragile and the credit conditions continue to tighten up.
Moreover, rising commodity prices continue to be a threat for price stability.
These uncertainties have been dampening the risk appetite and thus slowing down the capital flows to emerging markets, leaving these economies susceptible to shifts in the market sentiment.
Domestic uncertainties have exacerbated these effects, as manifested by the significant rise in the sovereign credit risk of Turkey in the first half of the year, compared to the average risk premium of emerging economies.
The CBT will not display a sharp reaction to temporary fluctuations in the financial markets, unless there is a long lasting deterioration in expectations and a significant worsening in the general pricing behavior.
Finally, our medium-term projections assume that government expenditures will evolve in line with the official projections and that there will be no further increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except those required by the automatic pricing mechanisms.
Any deviation from this framework may lead to a revision of the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
Regarding the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that the current level of the policy rate was supportive of disinflation.
Yet, it was also emphasized that ongoing uncertainties and supply side shocks continued to pose risks on inflation.
Therefore, the Committee members assessed that monetary policy should continue to maintain a cautious stance.
Accordingly, a further measured rate hike would be considered, when needed, to prevent the potential second-round effects of the risk factors.
The Committee once again underlined that the timing of a possible future rate hike would depend on developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
The Committee also indicated that it would be useful to clarify some issues related to operational aspects of monetary policy.
Excess liquidity sterilized in the overnight market has been shrinking in the second half of 2008 due to a reduction in the amount of FX purchased through regular auctions; fall in Treasury’s foreign debt rollover ratio, and rising money demand.
Still, there has been some undesired volatility in the overnight rates due to unforeseen movements in the liquidity, mainly arising from the banks’ demand for reserves.
Considering these developments, the Committee has decided to reduce the margin between the borrowing and the lending rates by 50 basis points.
Current projections do not point to a permanent shortage in the liquidity.
In case of a temporary shortage, the Central Bank will provide the required liquidity through repo auctions, targeting the overnight interest rate in the money market to stay close to the Central Bank borrowing rate.
Hence, the key policy rate will continue to be Central Bank’s overnight borrowing rate.
Consumer prices increased by 0.58 percent in July, pushing annual inflation up to 12.06 percent due to soaring energy prices and the base effect from food prices.
Food and energy items have accounted for 8.17 percentage points of annual inflation as of July.
Committee (the Committee) noted the relative deceleration in processed food inflation.
Bread prices, in particular, increased only slightly in July after having accelerated significantly in the first half of the year, while vegetable oil prices continued to rise, albeit at a lower rate.
The Committee expects the processed food inflation to ease in the remainder of the year.
On the unprocessed food prices front, annual inflation increased to 3.75 percent due to the low base from a year earlier.
Although drought conditions continue to put upward pressure on pulse prices, fruit and vegetable prices are expected to display a relatively more favorable course.
Energy prices increased by 5.79 percent in July on the back of the sharp rise in electricity and solid/liquid fuel prices.
Consequently, annual energy price inflation rose to 26.87 percent.
Hikes in electricity prices contributed by about 0.5 percentage points to monthly inflation in July.
In August, the increase in natural gas prices is expected to add around 0.15 percentage points to inflation; yet, the fall in fuel prices driven by lower oil prices will limit the rise in energy price inflation.
The annual inflation in prices of goods excluding energy and food remained unchanged from a month ago, at 4.20 percent.
Seasonal discounts led to a higher rate of decline in clothing prices compared to previous years.
The slowdown in both domestic and foreign demand had a dampening effect on clothing prices.
The strengthening of the new Turkish lira and the moderating domestic demand put downward pressure on prices of durable goods; yet white goods remained on the rise.
Lagged effects of supply shocks continued to have an adverse impact on services prices.
The year-on-year inflation in prices for transport and catering services picked up further in response to a sustained rise in food and energy prices, whereas rental rates continued to decelerate.
The annual rate of increase in the widely cited core CPI indexes, denoted by H and I, went slightly up in July on account of lagged effects from supply shocks and the base effect.
Seasonally adjusted monthly inflation figures, however, pointed to a slowdown in these indicators.
In view of the downtrend in underlying inflation over the past two months and the decline in oil prices, the Committee expects inflation to moderate gradually in the forthcoming period.
Recent data indicate that economic activity has continued to slow down.
After having expanded by 6.9 percent year-on-year in the first quarter, industrial production moderated to an annual growth rate of 3.1 percent during April- June 2008.
In seasonally adjusted terms, industrial production remained flat over the first half of the year.
Early indicators suggest that domestic demand in the second quarter has been weaker than the first quarter.
Consumer confidence indices stayed at lower levels than the first quarter, and the growth in real consumer loans have further slowed down.
The seasonally adjusted consumption indices, the production of chemicals, domestic sales of automobiles, and imports of consumer goods went down during January-June 2008.
In contrast, domestic sales of white goods recovered in the second quarter, although the production in the industry remained flat.
Domestic uncertainties and the depreciation of the new Turkish lira against major currencies had an adverse impact on investment demand in the second quarter.
The production of machinery-equipment declined further in seasonally adjusted terms, while imports of capital goods fell for the second quarter in a row.
Moreover, domestic sales of commercial vehicles suggested that machinery-equipment investments were slightly down from the first quarter.
The annual growth rate in export quantity index was 18.2 percent year-on-year in the first quarter, but declined to 9.1 percent in the second quarter.
Seasonally adjusted figures pointed to an ongoing, yet moderating export growth.
Recently, downside risks on global economy have increased, especially indicators for Euro area pointing to a slowdown.
The Committee assessed that external demand could be adversely affected, should this outlook persist.
Regarding demand indicators for the third quarter, consumer confidence indices rebounded slightly in July, yet still remained at low levels.
Meanwhile, real consumer loans continued to grow at a subdued pace.
In this context, the Committee stated that ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy continue to restrain the aggregate demand.
Considering the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that the level of the policy rate was supportive of disinflation.
The decline in longer- term interest rates owing to easing domestic uncertainties should support domestic demand.
However, aggregate demand is still expected to remain contained given relatively tight credit conditions, restrictive monetary policy, and moderating external demand.
The committee indicated that oil prices have followed a significantly lower course than the levels assumed in the baseline scenario in the July Inflation Report and other commodity prices have also displayed a downward course, improving the near-term inflation outlook.
Consequently, inflation is expected to fall gradually in the forthcoming period.
Food prices have been evolving in line with the projections outlined in the July Inflation Report.
It is anticipated that processed food inflation will gradually fall owing to lower commodity and import prices while unprocessed food inflation will maintain its current favorable course.
Yet, the Committee underlined the need to remain cautious with regard to assumptions on food and oil prices, given the volatile course of commodity prices.
The Committee noted that the rise in inflation expectations was limited although inflation outturn was significantly higher than the average of market expectations in June.
Inflation expectations should ease gradually as inflation starts decelerating in the forthcoming period.
Long-lasting supply shocks have been delaying disinflation and thus increasing the risk of rising backward looking schemes in the wage and price setting behavior.
International financial markets remain fragile.
Prevailing problems in financial markets continue to pose downside risks on global economic growth.
Persisting uncertainties in the global economy have been causing financial markets to be sensitive to data announcements.
Inflation and monetary policy outlook outlined above envisages that government expenditures and incomes policy will evolve in line with the official projections and that there will be no further increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except those required by the automatic pricing mechanisms.
In sum, prevailing risks regarding the price setting behavior and ongoing global uncertainties require monetary policy to remain cautious and to be more responsive to incoming data.
Future decisions on policy rates will depend on developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
Consumer prices fell by 0.24 percent in August, bringing inflation down to 11.77 percent year-on-year, largely owing to a reduction in annual food price inflation.
Despite the fall in fuel prices, hikes in natural gas and water rates increased annual energy price inflation.
The contribution of food and energy prices to annual inflation was down by 0.5 points from July to 7.7 percent in August.
Committee (the Committee) assessed that favorable outlook in food prices and the sharp decline in oil prices will support disinflation.
The annual rate of increase in food and non-alcoholic beverage prices decelerated by 2 percentage points to 13.33 percent.
With the ongoing correction in fruit and vegetable prices, annual inflation in unprocessed food prices slowed down to 0.68 percent in August.
The favorable trend in unprocessed food prices is expected to continue in the forthcoming period.
The relative slowdown in processed food prices has become more significant in August.
Recent decline in prices of bread and grains as well as oil and fats has been supporting the downward trend in processed food inflation.
Given the downward trend in processed food prices and the low base from last year, annual inflation in processed food prices is expected to ease markedly in September.
The Committee observed that, since the release of the latest Inflation Report, food prices have been following a more favorable course than envisaged, thanks to improved agricultural productivity and lower international prices.
Food inflation is expected to continue to ease in the remainder of the year.
Energy price inflation climbed up to an annual rate of 27.38 percent.
Despite the recent fall in oil prices, the cumulative past increases continue to put upward pressure on energy prices.
The hike in prices of natural gas, water and solid fuels in August is a case in point.
Moreover, the impending hike in electricity tariffs, effective October 1, and the potential rise in natural gas prices indicate that energy prices will continue to restrain the disinflation in the short term.
The hike in electricity tariffs is likely to contribute 0.23 percentage points to CPI inflation in October.
The annual inflation in prices of goods excluding energy and food remained unchanged from July, at 4.19 percent.
Seasonal discounts in August were relatively limited compared to July, pushing clothing price inflation up by 1.2 percentage points year-on-year.
On the other hand, the strengthening of the new Turkish lira and the weak domestic demand brought annual inflation in durable goods down by 1.6 percentage points from July.
Meanwhile, prices of pharmaceuticals rose by 4.64 percent, while gold prices were down 11.05 percent in August.
On the services front, lagged impacts of supply shocks continued to put upward pressure on prices of transport and catering services.
Nevertheless, the Committee noted that the monthly rate of increase in catering prices have recently slowed down, which should become more pronounced as food prices ease further.
Inflation in communication services, which were up 4 percentage points year-on-year on account of the base effect and soaring fixed-line tariffs, were the main driver of the rise in annual services inflation in August.
Rental inflation, on the other hand, remained on a steady decline.
Although the inflation measured by the widely cited core CPI indexes, denoted by H and I, went slightly up year-on-year due to the base effect and the lagged impact of supply shocks, seasonally adjusted figures suggest a downward trend in underlying inflation.
Recent readings indicate a significant slowdown in domestic economic activity.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 1.9 percent in the second quarter of 2008 in annual terms, but displayed a 0.6 percent quarterly decline in seasonally adjusted terms.
Net exports made a positive, though modest, contribution to growth, whereas private consumption and investment expenditures slowed down significantly.
Tightening global liquidity conditions and moderating domestic and foreign demand have put restrain on the industrial production.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that industrial production remained flat in July compared with the previous quarter, and the sharp downturn in industry capacity utilization rate in August points an ongoing slowdown in industrial production.
The uncertainty surrounding the global economy increased the downside risks to foreign demand.
Capacity utilization rates in industries such as textiles, clothing, vehicles and machinery-equipment, which account for a substantial share in exports, declined in August, indicating a lower contribution from external demand to economic growth.
On the other hand, the robust demand from oil exporting countries continues to support external demand.
The fall in agricultural production in the second quarter is believed to be short- lived since it has been partly driven by regional drought problems.
In fact, crop production forecasts for 2008, recently released by the TURKSTAT, point to a rising agricultural production in the second half of the year.
Leading indicators for the third quarter point to sluggish recovery in private consumption expenditure.
Although consumer confidence indices have rebounded to some extent, they are still at low levels compared with the episodes of vigorous domestic demand.
Monetary indicators, consumer loans, consumption indices and the Business Tendency Survey data suggest a similar outlook.
Recent readings indicate that investment expenditure have followed a flat course in the third quarter.
Indicators such as machinery-equipment production, imports of capital goods and sales of heavy commercial vehicles, point to a continued softening in machinery-equipment investments.
July data on production in the non-metallic minerals industry, a leading indicator for construction investments, are slightly up from June in seasonally adjusted terms, but down from the first-quarter average.
In addition, building permits fell by 20.1 percent year-on-year in the second quarter.
The steady decline in building permits since mid-2007 indicates that construction activities are unlikely to rebound in the upcoming period.
Public expenditures registered a fall in the first half of 2008 in annual terms.
Public spending is expected to accelerate in the second half of the year, in line with budgetary targets.
This will partly offset the slowdown in private expenditures, and hence, support the aggregate demand.
Overall, ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy continue to restrain both the domestic and external demand.
Therefore aggregate demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.
Accordingly, inflation is expected to fall gradually in the forthcoming period.
The Committee assessed that the current policy rate supports disinflation.
Moreover, the decline in the global risk appetite has been keeping longer-term interest rates at high levels and leading to tighter monetary conditions.
Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) has been presenting the inflation outlook under alternative scenarios for food and energy prices since the second quarter of the year.
This framework should improve the predictability of monetary policy by providing conditional forecasts for different realizations of shocks.
As a mater of fact, developments since the publication of July Inflation Report have confirmed the relevance of this strategy.
Oil prices have followed a significantly lower course than the level assumed in the baseline scenario.
Similarly, recent developments in agricultural commodity prices and in domestic agricultural production indicate a more favorable outlook for food prices than envisaged in the Inflation Report.
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that the course of oil and food prices has been closer to the optimistic scenario outlined in the July Inflation Report, and therefore, a measured rate cut would be considered should the favorable outlook in inflation and commodity prices continue.
Recently, problems in the global financial markets have intensified.
Regarding the inflation outlook, these developments create upside risks through potential portfolio movements and downside risks through aggregate demand.
Yet, current circumstances require monetary policy to be flexible on both sides.
Depending on the impact of the ongoing financial turmoil on the domestic economy, the Committee will consider measured rate cuts as well as temporary tightening through active liquidity management.
Despite the recent decline in commodity prices, lagged effects of the long lasting supply shocks continue to exert pressure on headline inflation especially through domestic energy prices, keeping alive the risks of generalized backward looking schemes in the wage and price setting behavior.
Although the widening output gap should contain the second round effects of the supply shocks, the exact pace of disinflation would still depend on the extent new inflation targets serve as a reference for economic agents.
A critical underlying assumption for the inflation and monetary policy outlook outlined above is that government expenditures and incomes policy will evolve in line with the official projections, and that there will be no further increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except those required by the automatic pricing mechanisms.
In sum, despite the improvement in inflation outlook, the Committee assessed that recently heightened uncertainties in the global financial markets require monetary policy to remain cautious and decided to keep policy rates constant.
Future decisions on policy rates will depend on domestic and external demand, developments in global markets, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
Meeting agenda also included an assessment of liquidity developments in money markets.
In order to alleviate the tightening in liquidity conditions since May, the CBT has been injecting Turkish lira liquidity into the markets via repo operations.
Recent developments suggest that tight liquidity conditions may last through 2009 and onwards.
The Committee members, referring to the main policy document “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy in 2008” dated December 18th 2007, noted that the current outlook for liquidity conditions may call for a technical adjustment in short term interest rates.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to initiate the preparations for the redesign of the operational framework of liquidity management in 2009, details of which will be announced in December.
Consumer prices increased by 0.45 percent in September, and annual inflation fell down to 11.13 percent mainly with the significant easing in annual food price inflation.
The contribution of food and energy prices to annual inflation declined to 7 percent in September.
Deceleration in food prices became more pronounced in September.
Food inflation decreased by a cumulative 4.2 points in the last two months to 11.07 percent year-on-year.
The decline in fresh fruit and vegetable prices, driven by higher production compared to a year ago, has led to further slowdown in unprocessed food prices.
In addition, after a drought-driven persistent increase over the past twelve months, pulse prices finally declined in September, which was another key driver of the downward trend in unprocessed food prices.
Processed food prices fell by 0.29 percent, which is the lowest September inflation for this sub-group in recent years, leading to a substantial reduction in its annual inflation, as predicted in the previous Summary of the .
Committee (the Committee) Meeting.
In view of higher agricultural production and lower international prices, the Committee reiterated that annual processed food inflation would continue to ease in the remainder of the year.
The Committee also noted, however, that inflation may display a modest and temporary rise in October due to volatile vegetable prices.
Energy price inflation dropped by 0.6 points in September to 26.79 percent year-on-year.
Although world oil prices have plummeted recently and fuel prices have moderated, sharp increases in prices of solid fuels –21.22 percent in the last three months– curbed the downward trend in energy price inflation.
The hike in natural gas and electricity rates is expected to put upward pressure on energy prices in October, with a contribution of 0.27 points to CPI inflation.
The annual inflation in prices of goods excluding energy and food remained stable for the third consecutive month, at 4.17 percent.
In the clothing group, domestic and foreign demand conditions have limited inflation.
Prices of durable goods fell slightly in September after a steep decline over the past two months, while the base effect drove the group’s annual inflation up by 1 percentage point.
Given the depreciation of the new Turkish lira (YTL) and the low base from the fourth quarter in 2007, the annual inflation in prices of durable goods is expected to rise further in the final quarter.
Services inflation continued to increase on the back of rising prices of transport and communication services.
Lagged pass-through effects of former upswings in oil prices continued to put upward pressure on prices of transport services via rising school bus rates.
Meanwhile, the annual rate of increase in prices for communication services went up to 9.10 percent due to surging fixed-line tariffs and mobile call rates.
On the other hand, annual rental inflation remained on a steady decline.
CPI excluding energy, unprocessed food, tobacco and gold (the H index), went slightly down year-on-year, while inflation measured by the I index, which further excludes processed food prices, increased by 0.2 percentage points.
Recently, both indexes have risen at a slower pace in monthly seasonally adjusted terms compared to previous quarters, indicating a slowdown in the underlying inflation.
Problems in international credit markets and in global economy have continued to put restrain on domestic economic activity.
In August, industrial production and manufacturing production dropped by 4 and 5.7 percent, respectively, from a year ago.
Production went down in almost all sub- industries in August.
Data on industrial production in July-August period and on the manufacturing industry tendency survey in September suggest that industrial production contracted in the third quarter.
The weakening in domestic and foreign demand will continue to have an adverse impact on the economic activity in the final quarter.
In fact, motor vehicles, textiles and clothing exports in the first three weeks of October have displayed a significant fall.
Besides, Business Tendency Survey results regarding three-month ahead expectations for sales and stocks of final goods also support the outlook mentioned above.
Private consumption spending was flat in the third quarter, as suggested by the data on consumer loans, imports of consumer goods, consumption and confidence indices, and domestic sales of automobiles and white goods.
The deepening global financial crisis indicates that credit conditions may further tighten.
In fact, consumer loan growth for the first three weeks of October confirms this picture.
Private investment spending continued to slow down in the third quarter.
July- August average of both imports and production of machinery-equipment, electric machinery and appliances and other non-metallic minerals was down from a quarter earlier.
Meanwhile, domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles and investment appetite in that industry have declined.
In view of the global financial turmoil, private investment spending is expected to slow down in the fourth quarter.
In the second quarter, the moderation in imports had been more significant than that in exports in real terms, resulting in a positive contribution from net exports to growth.
With a similar trend in external trade as well as increased tourism revenues, net exports are likely to continue to have a positive contribution to growth in the third quarter.
The expected slowdown in the global economic activity, which led to a reduction in import demand, especially in advanced economies, poses a threat to Turkey’s export performance for the upcoming period.
Although the significantly increased share of exports to non- EU member states and the US signals an increased potential for market expansion, export growth is likely to decelerate in the coming months.
Moreover, the softening in domestic demand and the depreciation of the YTL will lead to a marked slowdown in imports in the fourth quarter.
Overall, imports are expected to slow down at a faster pace than exports, which will help net exports to support GDP growth.
In sum, recent readings indicate a significant slowdown in domestic economic activity.
Ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy will continue to restrain both domestic and external demand.
Accordingly, aggregate demand conditions will increasingly support disinflation.
The meeting agenda included an assessment of the inflation forecasts to appear in the October Inflation Report.
The Committee stated that inflationary impact of the recent exchange rate movements would be offset by the favorable outlook in food prices and the sharp decline in oil prices.
Therefore, medium term inflation forecasts did not change significantly compared to the previous quarter.
Inflation is expected to display a limited and temporary rise in October due to volatile vegetable prices, yet continue to decline gradually in the medium term.
Accordingly, the Committee at this point does not envision a significant revision in medium term inflation forecasts.
However, it should be noted that the intensification of the financial market turmoil requires caution in terms of both the monetary policy and the inflation outlook.
In this respect, the Committee decided to keep borrowing rates –the key policy rates– unchanged.
On the other hand, the Committee decided to lower the lending rates by 50 basis points in order to contain the potential volatility in the short-term interest rates.
It was noted that, since overnight rates may move towards the Central Bank lending rates during times of temporary liquidity squeeze in the market, narrowing down the margin between Central Bank lending and borrowing rates would reduce the uncertainty regarding the overnight rates.
This margin will be narrowed further, the extent of which would depend on liquidity developments.
The meeting agenda also included an assessment of the developments in the local foreign exchange markets.
The Committee emphasized the essence of a liquid foreign exchange market for a healthy financial system, and stated that supporting the liquidity positions of the banks should be the priority under current conditions.
The Committee also suggested that raising the transaction limits at the Foreign Exchange Deposit Markets would be helpful in this regard.
It was also agreed that other measures could be implemented if needed.
In this respect, it was noted that the Central Bank retains the option of conducting foreign exchange sales auctions or direct interventions, should there be unhealthy price movements due to a loss of depth in the foreign exchange markets.
Looking ahead, credit conditions are expected to continue to tighten in the forthcoming period.
Regarding the inflation outlook, these developments create upside risks through potential portfolio movements in the short term, but downside risks through weaker aggregate demand in the medium term.
Given the uncertainty surrounding the global economic outlook, monetary policy needs to be flexible on either side.
Therefore, future monetary policy decisions will depend on the impact of the ongoing global financial turmoil on the domestic economy.
Commodity prices continue to be volatile, creating risks to the inflation outlook.
Despite the downward revision in projections for food and energy prices, our main scenario is still based on quite conservative assumptions, implying that the risks are on both sides.
Should the upside risks materialize, monetary policy will be conducted so as to minimize deviations from the targets.
Downward surprises in food and energy prices, on the other hand, will be perceived as an opportunity to bring inflation down at a faster pace than implied by our medium term targets.
Finally, a critical underlying assumption for the inflation and monetary policy outlook outlined above is that government expenditures and incomes policy will evolve in line with the official projections, and that there will be no further increases in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except those required by the automatic pricing mechanisms in place.
In particular, this means any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would occur largely through expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes.
The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy.
Future policy decisions will largely depend on the developments in global markets and their reflections on the global financial markets.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to maintain the resilience of the economy against the global financial turmoil.
Preserving the fiscal discipline and strengthening the structural reform agenda would also help to mitigate the adverse effects of the ongoing shocks on the domestic economy.
In particular, advances in structural reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance productivity gains, are monitored closely by the CBT with regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices increased by 2.60 percent in October, pushing annual inflation up to 11.99 percent, mainly on account of the temporary rise in vegetable prices.
The plunge in world oil prices helped to ease fuel prices, but the increase in electricity, natural gas and solid fuel prices put further upward pressure on energy price inflation.
The contribution of food and energy prices to annual inflation went up to 7.6 percentage points, while annual services inflation declined.
The sharp increase in unprocessed food prices in October drove food prices up by 3.91 percent on the back of soaring fresh fruit and vegetable prices that were up around 30 percent.
Accordingly, the increase in fresh fruit and vegetable prices accounted for 1.7 percentage points of the 2.6 percent rise in monthly CPI.
Annual processed food inflation, on the other hand, fell by a cumulative 6.2 percentage points in three months.
The downtrend in processed food inflation is expected to continue into coming months on the back of favorable prices for bread and grains and solid and liquid fats.
Although fuel prices dropped by 2.35 percent, energy price inflation climbed to 30.98 percent year-on-year in October amid rising electricity, natural gas and solid fuel prices.
Electricity prices have soared by a cumulative 56 percent since the beginning of the year, while solid fuel prices have jumped by 31.5 percent in four months.
Price cuts of 15 and 10.3 percent on liquid petroleum gas and bottled gas, respectively, are expected to curb the impact of the natural gas price hike of 22.5 percent in early November on CPI inflation.
In view of these developments and the base effect, annual energy inflation is expected to fall in November.
Prices of goods excluding energy and food rose by 1 percentage point to 5.17 percent year-on-year in October.
In the clothing group, annual inflation remained low, while in the durables group (excl.
gold) inflation went up due to the base effect and the exchange rate developments.
Given the exchange rate pass-through and the low base from a year ago, the annual inflation in durable goods is expected to rise further in November.
Annual inflation in services, which had been on the rise since March, moderated in October with the easing supply shocks and the weakening of domestic demand.
Accordingly, annual services inflation was down by 0.5 percentage points to 10.97 percent in October.
In fact, inflation in all services categories declined in October.
Recently, seasonally adjusted core inflation indicators also point to a slowdown in underlying inflation.
The adverse impact of the global financial crisis on the Turkish economy has become more visible.
Recent information points to a pronounced slowdown in domestic economic activity.
Industrial production fell by 5.5 percent in September from a year earlier.
Third quarter industrial production dropped by 2.1 percent in annual terms and 3.5 percent quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
This outcome was mainly driven by the decline in the activities of export-oriented industries.
Leading indicators suggest that industrial production will continue to weaken in the fourth quarter.
In October, the capacity utilization in manufacturing industry fell to 76.7 percent, down by 6.4 percentage points from a year ago.
Similarly, the Business Tendency Survey in October showed that new orders in the manufacturing industry for the next three months and expected production have declined sharply.
After having remained flat in the third quarter, private consumption spending will fall markedly in the fourth quarter, as suggested by recent indicators.
Domestic sales of automobiles dropped in October while consumer loans fell in real terms from a month ago.
In addition, expectations for domestic sales in the next three months have fallen remarkably, and consumer confidence indices displayed a sharp decline on the back of global economic concerns.
Leading indicators suggest that the investment spending continued to slow down in the third quarter.
In seasonally adjusted terms, both production and imports in the machinery-equipment industry and the electric machinery and appliances industry fell in the third quarter.
Likewise, domestic sales of heavy commercial vehicles continued to decline in October.
Imports of capital goods, on the other hand, grew at a modest pace in the third quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Yet, the recent depreciation in domestic currency will likely to curb the investment demand in the fourth quarter.
Meanwhile, medium term investment sentiment of the industrial sector continued to weaken, as suggested by the results of October’s Business Tendency Survey.
In view of these developments, private investment spending on machinery-equipment is expected to weaken further in the third and fourth quarters.
Besides, recent indicators also point to a marked decline in construction activities in the second half of the year.
Due to the sharp global economic downturn, Turkey’s export market share has fallen markedly.
Exports displayed a year-on-year fall by 3.1 percent in September.
Although the increased share of exports to non-EU and US countries signals a potential for market expansion, Turkey’s export performance in the near term is likely to be weaker compared to previous years.
Given the expectations for export orders in the coming three months and rates of capacity utilization in export-oriented industries in October, export volume is expected to fall in the final quarter.
Overall, imports are expected to decline at a slightly faster pace than exports, which will lead to a positive contribution from net exports to GDP growth.
In sum, recent readings indicate that the economic activity continued to weaken in the third quarter.
Due to tighter credit conditions and the deterioration in consumer and investor confidence, domestic demand will continue to fall in the fourth quarter.
The meeting focused on the developments since the publication of the October Inflation Report.
The Committee stated that ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy would continue to restrain both domestic and external demand for an extended period 13.
The Committee members expect the pass-through from exchange rates to domestic inflation to remain low in the current period compared to the past episodes.
The Inflation Report involved no major revision in the medium term inflation forecasts, as the impact of the pass-through from the exchange rate depreciation to inflation was expected to be largely offset by the favorable food and energy prices and the weakening demand.
Recently, weaker-than- expected economic activity has reinforced the Committee’s view that the pass- through would remain muted.
The Committee has reiterated that the sharp decline in oil and other commodity prices would have a favorable impact on disinflation.
Recently, import prices have been easing due to ongoing weakness in global economic activity.
Therefore, domestic prices of imported goods are not expected to display a significant rise, notwithstanding the depreciation in the nominal exchange rate.
This should be another factor limiting the exchange rate pass- through.
In sum, considering the recent data, the Committee has judged that inflation would display a more rapid fall than envisaged before.
The Committee members have stated that although some pass-through from exchange rates to certain core inflation measures is unavoidable, this should be seen as a change in relative prices rather than a rise in underlying inflation.
Given that medium term inflation outlook is mainly driven by supply and demand conditions, inflation should trend downwards in the forthcoming period.
The Committee underscored the need to remain cautious in monetary policy decisions to ensure a sustained fall in inflation.
On the other hand, the Committee members have indicated that recently domestic financial conditions have been tighter than required by the current stance of monetary policy, owing mainly to the intensification of global financial crisis.
In this context, it was stated that a measured rate cut would partially offset the extra tightening in monetary conditions.
Based on these assessments, the Committee has decided to lower the borrowing rates by 50 basis points.
Moreover, the margin between the lending and borrowing rates was reduced by a further 50 basis points in order to contain the potential volatility in short term interest rates.
The Committee has underscored the importance of maintaining the smooth functioning of the financial system and the efficiency of credit markets, and has thus decided to implement additional measures regarding the foreign exchange liquidity.
As a lender of last resort, the Central Bank has at its disposal the tools necessary to manage the Turkish Lira liquidity directly, and therefore is able to supply the required liquidity to support the smooth functioning of financial and credit markets.
Foreign exchange liquidity conditions, on the other hand, are largely determined by global factors.
Accordingly, considering the existing level of uncertainty in the global economy, the Committee members have underlined the importance of utilizing the foreign exchange reserves primarily to support the foreign exchange liquidity of the banking system, in line with the plan announced on October the 30th.
Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, provided that they do not conflict with the price stability objective.
Future policy decisions will largely depend on the developments in global markets and their reflections on the domestic economy.
It should be emphasized that monetary policy needs to remain flexible, and sensitive to new data and developments.
Central government budgetary outturns were in line with the targets in the first three quarters of the year.
The slowdown in economic activity will moderate tax revenues, and hence create downside risks on budgetary revenues.
Inflation outlook presented above assumes that the fall in energy prices will be fully passed through domestic energy prices.
In this context, it is important that any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would be implemented through expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes.
The Committee emphasized that outlook for inflation and monetary policy may be affected by the deviations from this framework.
Consumer prices increased by 0.83 percent in November and annual inflation declined to 10.76 percent.
Processed food and energy inflation eased on the back of falling commodity prices, while exchange rate pass-through to domestic prices remained limited.
In addition, services inflation continued to moderate owing to the weakening in domestic demand.
Processed food prices fell in November, whereas unprocessed food prices continued to rise on soaring vegetable prices.
Annual inflation in processed food prices registered a cumulative drop of 8.6 points in four months, and is expected to decelerate further in the upcoming period.
Owing mainly to the last year’s base effect created by the excise tax hikes and the sharp increase in water rates, annual energy price inflation declined by 6.9 points to 24.09 percent in November.
Given the reductions in fuel and LPG prices in December, energy prices will continue to support disinflation.
Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food declined by about 1.3 points to 3.83 percent, mainly on account of the moderation in clothing price inflation driven by weak demand conditions.
In the durables group (excl.
gold), annual inflation rose by about 1 point due to the lagged impact of exchange rate movements.
Committee (the Committee) noted that the short-term exchange rate pass-through in durable goods has been significantly lower than the levels implied by the historical estimates.
The easing in supply shocks and the softening in domestic demand continued to have a favorable impact on services prices in November, bringing its annual inflation down to 10.88 percent.
Rent inflation continued to moderate.
Annual inflation in catering prices has further declined on slowing food inflation and weakening domestic demand.
Moreover, the fall in fuel prices has started to put downward pressure on transport prices.
Accordingly, seasonally adjusted core inflation indicators also remained on a downward track.
Third quarter GDP developments were largely consistent with the outlook provided in the October Inflation Report.
Public spending and net exports were the main drivers of GDP growth.
Imports contracted for the first time since the fourth quarter of 2001, and the contribution of net exports turned positive.
On the other hand, the contribution of private domestic demand declined considerably, especially owing to the weakening in investments.
Thus, annual GDP growth in the third quarter decelerated significantly down to 0.5 percent.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted figures suggest that quarterly GDP growth was negative in the second and third quarters of 2008.
Indicators on economic activity suggest that the adverse impact of the global economic downturn on both domestic and aggregate demand has intensified in the fourth quarter.
Readings on production, capacity utilization, and business confidence point to a marked contraction in economic activity.
Ongoing problems in global financial markets have led to a slump in consumer confidence.
Following the sharp drop in October, consumer confidence indexes remained at low levels in November.
The softening in consumption, the tightening of financial conditions, and the reduction in loan supply has restrained credit growth.
Accordingly, consumer loans slowed down considerably in October and November.
Other indicators for consumer demand also suggest a weakening in the fourth quarter.
Domestic sales of automobiles plummeted in October and November, falling well below the third-quarter average.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted consumption indexes point to a contraction in private consumer demand in November.
Imports of consumer goods, especially passenger cars and non- durable goods, continued to trend downward.
Indicators remain weak for investments.
In seasonally adjusted terms, machinery-equipment production fell for the fourth quarter in a row.
Imports of capital goods in October were below their third-quarter average.
Domestic sales of commercial vehicles displayed a downward trend in October and November, while Business Tendency Survey pointed to a significant deterioration in expected investment spending.
Besides the marked reduction in domestic demand, foreign demand has also significantly weakened due to the marked slowdown in global economic activity.
Exports fell by 6.5 percent year-on-year in October and posted a steep decline in seasonally adjusted terms.
Exports of motor vehicles − a key driver of total exports − fell by 43.9 percent year-on-year in November.
The slowdown in imports has also intensified in October, which was down by 15.3 percent in year-on-year terms.
Given the fact that imports declined at a faster pace than exports, net foreign demand is expected to make a positive contribution to growth in the final quarter.
Data on labor market confirms the significant slowdown in economic activity.
Non-farm employment remained flat in the third quarter, resulting in a marked rise in unemployment rate.
The Committee emphasized that the labor market conditions will continue to restrain domestic demand and labor costs.
Recent readings indicate that the slowdown in the domestic economic activity has intensified.
Ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy are expected to continue to restrain both the domestic and external demand for an extended period, putting downward pressure on inflation.
The disinflation in core price indices has been so far limited due to the lagged impact of the exchange rate pass-through.
Yet, the Committee expects a more significant deceleration in the underlying inflation as the services inflation eases in the forthcoming period.
The developments in oil and other commodity prices are having a favorable impact on disinflation.
In fact, the contribution of energy and food prices is down by 1.4 percentage points since June.
Looking ahead, energy and food prices are expected to continue to contribute to the disinflation process.
Although inflation expectations have shown signs of easing recently, they are still above the medium term targets.
The Committee judged that inflation expectations will follow a downward trend in the forthcoming period as the deceleration in headline inflation becomes more significant.
In this respect, it was stated that the Central Bank should put more emphasis in its own inflation forecasts.
In light of these assessments, the Committee judged that inflation would display a rapid fall in the forthcoming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to lower short-term interest rates by 125 basis points.
The cumulative rate cuts have reached 175 basis points in the last two months.
Considering the prevailing tightness in financial conditions and the benign inflation outlook, the Committee indicated that there was room for further monetary accommodation.
However, it was stated that, given the existing global uncertainties, it would be appropriate to maintain flexibility regarding future policy decisions.
In this respect, the extent and the timing of the next rate cut will depend on the factors affecting inflation outlook.
Uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the real economy remain at high levels.
Recently, the forecasts on global economic growth have been continuously revised downwards.
Given that factors affecting domestic inflation have been driven largely by global developments, medium term inflation risks are seen mostly on the downside.
The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, provided that they do not conflict with the price stability objective.
In particular, advances in structural reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance productivity gains, are monitored closely by the Central Bank with regard to their implications on macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices decreased by 0.41 percent in December, and annual inflation in 2008 materialized at 10.06 percent.
Falling oil and other commodity prices continued to push down energy and processed food inflation, and the marked slowdown in economic activity put further downward pressure on services inflation.
In addition, core inflation indicators remained on the decline.
Unprocessed food prices rose sharply for the third consecutive month in December on elevated vegetable prices, whereas annual inflation in processed food continued to fall, registering a cumulative drop of 10 percentage points in five months on the back of improved production and lower international prices.
Inflation in processed food prices is expected to decelerate further in the first half of 2009.
Energy prices dropped by 2.58 percent in December, mainly on account of plummeting world crude oil prices that exerted a strong downward pressure on domestic fuel and bottled gas prices.
With the sizeable drop in December, the fall in domestic fuel prices reached a cumulative of 20 percent in five months.
Given the current falling trend in international commodity prices, energy prices will continue to support disinflation.
Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food continued to decline in December on falling clothing prices, ending 2008 at 3.75 percent.
After a sharp rise in October and November, prices for durable goods (excl.
gold) decreased by 0.43 percent in December.
Yet, the low base pushed the group’s annual inflation up by 0.5 points.
Recent price developments indicate that the short term pass-through of the recent weakening in the Turkish lira had a significantly lower impact on prices of durable goods compared with previous years.
Services inflation remains on the decline owing to lower costs and weaker domestic demand.
Annual inflation fell in all sub-categories of services in December.
The marked decline in processed food prices continued to have a favorable impact on catering prices, while plunging oil prices brought annual inflation in transport prices down.
The downtrend in transport prices is likely to become more pronounced in the upcoming period.
Meanwhile, rent inflation continued to moderate in December, falling by 0.4 points to 11.85 percent year-on-year.
Committee (the Committee) expects services inflation to decelerate further in coming months.
In line with these developments, seasonally adjusted core inflation figures also remained on a downward track in December, suggesting that underlying inflation continued to slow down.
This development is particularly remarkable, given that in the last quarter there has been a significant depreciation in exchange rates.
Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 0.5 percent year-on-year in the third quarter of 2008.
Seasonally adjusted figures suggest that the level of economic activity was below the previous quarter.
Recent readings indicate that the slowdown in the domestic economic activity has further intensified in the fourth quarter.
Industrial production, which has been falling since July in seasonally adjusted terms, has shown a 10.7 percent annual drop during October-November period.
Readings on capacity utilization also point to a further weakening in the industrial production in December.
Fourth-quarter indicators for consumer demand continued to trend downward.
Production of consumer goods was significantly down during October- November from a quarter ago.
The demand for imported consumer goods also followed the same pattern.
After the sizable drop in October and November, consumer confidence indexes remained at low levels in December, and consumer lending declined in nominal terms in the fourth quarter.
Overall, recent readings suggest that private consumer spending contracted both in quarterly and annual terms in the final quarter of 2008.
Heightened signs of prolonged global economic recession since October worsened the outlook for foreign demand.
After having grown by 12.2 percent year-on-year during the first nine months of 2008, exports quantity index dropped by 8.4 percent in October and November.
Moreover, December Business Tendency Survey (BTS) has indicated expectations of further deterioration in export orders for the first quarter of 2009.
Production and imports of capital goods, key proxies for investment demand, fell by 22.4 and 16.5 percent year-on-year, respectively, during October- November, and were quite below their third-quarter average in seasonally adjusted terms.
The data on production, imports and exports of investment goods indicate that machinery-equipment investment spending have dropped remarkably in the fourth-quarter in annual terms.
In fact, according to BTS results, there is a growing number of firms that consider their production capacity as “more than sufficient” in view of their current order books and demand expectations.
Hence, twelve-month ahead investment expectations continued to weaken.
The slowdown in economic activity is clearly reflected in the labor market.
Non-farm unemployment increased by 1.7 points to 14 percent in September- November period from a year ago.
The Committee noted that non-farm unemployment is likely to rise further, dampening both unit labor costs and domestic demand in the forthcoming period.
The Committee assessed the assumptions underlying the outlook in the Inflation Report.
It was stated that currently the most critical variable is the global economic growth.
Latest forecasts suggest that ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy will last longer than previously envisaged.
With the intensification of global financial crisis, overall loss of confidence, wealth destruction and tightening of credit conditionsespecially for the business sectorhave led to a marked downturn in the global economic activity.
Growth forecasts for the global economy have been constantly revised downwards in the last couple of months.
The Committee assessed that it would be appropriate to use the predictions appeared in the latest Consensus Forecasts survey for the baseline scenario in the Inflation Report.
Accordingly, the outlook in the Inflation Report was based on the assumption of a gradual recovery in the global economy starting from the first quarter of 2010.
The Committee stated that significant fall in oil and other commodity prices were having a favorable impact on disinflation.
Energy price inflation displayed a significant fall in the last quarter of the year, yet it materialized at around 20 percent by the end of the year.
Therefore, given the recent decline in oil prices, the Committee members think there is still ample room for fall in energy inflation.
Accordingly, the contribution of energy prices to headline inflation is expected to come down considerably throughout 2009.
In a similar vein, processed food inflation is expected to decelerate further.
Therefore, downward pressures on both domestic and external demand and inflation will continue.
Judging that inflation will be close to the target by mid- 2009 and that the probability of undershooting the end-year target has increased, the Committee decided to cut policy rates by 200 basis points.
Credit conditions tightened considerably and bank loan rates displayed a sharp rise after the intensification of the global financial crisis.
The pace of consumer credit growth suggests that financial conditions were restrictive in the last quarter of 2008, as consumer loans fell in nominal terms for the first time in the near history.
Recent easing in monetary policy has helped to relieve the tension in domestic credit markets, as there has been a significant fall in consumer loan rates following the policy rate cuts.
Yet, business loan rates remain elevated.
The Committee underscored the adverse impact of the weakening economic activity on corporate profits and thus on lending appetite.
In this context, it was indicated that the tightening in financial conditions might persist; necessitating interest rate cuts to continue, albeit at a decelerating pace.
Developments in the global economy will be the main determinant of the outlook for domestic inflation and monetary policy in the medium term.
Hence, in order to enhance the predictability and transparency of monetary policy, the Committee concluded that it would be useful to present two alternative scenarios in the final chapter of the January Inflation Report, each one based on different timing and speed of the recovery in the global economic activity.
The two alternative scenarios are embedded in our forecasts through four main channels: External trade, portfolio flows, commodity prices, and credit channels.
The first alternative scenario is based on a relatively fast recovery in the world economy.
In this scenario we assume that the monetary and fiscal measures taken by the major developed economies will be adequate to start pulling the global economy out of the recession in the second half of 2009.
Accordingly, a rapid and stronger-than-envisaged recovery in the global economic activity would lead to a rebound in commodity prices, resurge in capital inflows to emerging economies, pick up in external demand, and relaxation in credit conditions.
Under this scenario, meeting medium term inflation targets of 7,5, 6,5 and 5,5 percent in the 2009-2011 period, respectively, could require measured policy rate hikes towards the end of 2009.
The second alternative scenario is based on the assumption of a further deepening in global crisis in the first half of 2009 and an extended period of weakness in global economic activity until the second half of 2010.
In this scenario a more protracted and slow recovery would lead to another wave of portfolio shock for emerging markets, weak external demand, tighter credit conditions, and further drops in commodity prices.
Our forecasts suggest that, in such a case, medium term inflation targets could be undershot even with a measured sequel of policy rate cuts throughout 2009.
The Committee noted that pass-through from exchange rates to the domestic inflation has been so far limited compared to previous episodes, owing to weakening domestic demand and falling import prices.
Yet, it was indicated that it would be too early to make a conclusive statement on the extent of the medium term pass-through.
Finally, it is worth to mention that a critical assumption underlying the inflation and monetary policy outlook outlined above is that government fiscal stance will remain neutral in cyclically adjusted terms, and that there will be no changes in indirect taxes or administered price adjustments, except those required by the existing automatic pricing mechanisms.
Any significant deviation from this framework may lead to a revision of the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
The extent and the timing of a possible future rate cut will depend on the factors affecting inflation outlook.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to maintain the resilience of the economy against the global crisis, especially under current conditions.
Preserving the fiscal discipline and strengthening the structural reform agenda is also critical to mitigate the adverse effects of the ongoing shocks on the domestic economy.
In particular, advances in structural reforms, which would improve the quality of fiscal discipline and enhance productivity gains, are monitored closely by the Central Bank with regard to their implications for macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices increased by 0.29 percent in January, and inflation dropped to 9.50 percent year-on-year.
Exchange rate pass-through remained low owing to the marked slowdown in economic activity, while easing oil and other commodity prices continued to help bring inflation down.
Unprocessed food prices continued to rise whereas processed food inflation remained on the decline.
Unprocessed food price inflation is expected to ease in the short run due to favorable weather conditions and weak foreign demand.
On the processed food prices front, annual inflation is expected to remain on a downward path in the first half of 2009.
Accordingly, food prices will continue to contribute to disinflation in the coming months.
Annual energy price inflation dropped by a cumulative 16 points to 15.02 percent in the last three months on falling oil and other commodity prices.
Energy price inflation will continue to fall with the reduction in natural gas rates in February, which will have around 0.3 percentage points downward contribution to inflation.
Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food increased by 1 point to 4.74 percent in January.
After displaying a sharp drop in December due to early seasonal discounts, clothing prices decreased at a less marked pace in January than in previous year, pushing the group’s annual inflation up in January.
Meanwhile, the ongoing weakening in economic activity continued to mitigate the exchange rate pass-through on prices of durable goods.
Accordingly durable goods inflation increased only slightly to an annual rate of 3.46 percent in January.
Inflation in services declined to 9.89 percent in January.
The significant slowdown in annual services inflation suggests a downward course in the underlying inflation trend.
Plunging world oil prices have brought transport inflation down, while weaker domestic demand and lower food prices have had a favorable impact on catering prices.
Rent inflation eased further in January.
Given the continued softening in domestic demand, annual inflation in services is expected to moderate further.
Committee (the Committee) expects inflation to decelerate at a faster pace in the coming months, thanks to the fall in underlying inflation and the favorable base effect.
Recent readings suggest that economic activity continues to weaken.
Industrial production, which has been on the fall in seasonally adjusted terms since July, displayed a sharp contraction in the final quarter.
Readings on capacity utilization and other key indicators point to a further decline in industrial production in January.
Readings on the labor market confirm the sharp weakening of economic activity.
In the fourth quarter of 2008, non-farm employment fell quarterly on a seasonally adjusted basis, and non-farm unemployment surged rapidly.
The fall in non-farm employment can be attributed not only to the slowdown in overall economic activity but also to the sectoral shock driven by the sharp decline in exports.
The number of people receiving unemployment benefits increased markedly in January, suggesting that the rise in unemployment accelerated in early 2009.
In light of these assessments, the Committee noted that non-farm unemployment might display a historic high in the first quarter.
Recent readings indicate that although consumer sentiment has shown signs of recovery, it has remained low by historical standards.
Automobiles sales displayed a contraction in annual terms since June, whereas they increased in December and January in seasonally adjusted terms.
Consumption indices followed a similar pattern, showing a slight recovery in January.
The deterioration in consumer confidence stopped in December-January period, while housing and personal loans have displayed signs of recovery recently.
However, the Committee noted that it would be too early to make a conclusive statement whether these indicators point to a long lasting recovery.
Indicators for investment demand continued to display a weak course.
Production and imports of capital goods dropped dramatically in the final quarter of 2008, both in annual and quarterly terms.
The Committee indicated that the recovery in investment spending would take time, given the historically low capacity utilization rates.
Industrial production indexes in advanced economies registered a sizable drop in December and foreign demand remained weak on slower global growth.
Accordingly, the export quantity index continued to fall in December, posting a steep quarterly drop in the fourth quarter of 2008.
Nominal export figures on January and February suggests that the weakening of foreign demand continued into the first quarter.
Problems in international credit markets and the global economy persist, while new information lead to further downward revisions in the forecasts for global economic outlook.
Uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the real economy remain high.
In this context, domestic and foreign demand are expected to stay weak in the near term, and thus it will take some time for the economic activity to recover.
Therefore, downward pressures on inflation are expected to prevail.
The Committee indicated that the recovery in credit would be slow, reflecting tight financial conditions both in domestic and external terms.
Besides, disposal income growth is expected to remain subdued, given the moderating employment growth and weakening labor market conditions.
Therefore, the recovery in domestic demand is expected to be gradual and slow, which is also supported by the recent readings on domestic economic activity.
The fall in oil and other commodity prices are having a favorable impact on inflation, and thus contributing to the decline in inflation expectations.
Recently, survey based medium term inflation expectations have been lower than the inflation targets.
The Committee expects a rapid deceleration in inflation in the short term with more significant contribution of easing energy and food inflation.
This should also bring down inflation expectations further.
Looking ahead, it is anticipated that developments in both the aggregate demand conditions and the real marginal costs will drive down inflation significantly in the forthcoming period, bringing inflation to the target levels sooner than envisaged.
Judging that inflation is likely to undershoot the target significantly at the end of the year, the Committee decided to lower short-term interest rates by 150 basis points.
In line with the baseline scenario at the January Inflation Report, the Committee stated that the amount of the next rate cut would likely be less than the current one and reiterated that the extent and the timing of a possible future rate cut would depend on the factors affecting the inflation outlook.
Business loan rates have responded less to the policy rate cuts compared to the consumer loan rates.
Accordingly, the spread between business loan rates and the policy rates have remained at significantly high levels.
In this respect, the Committee indicated that the tightness in financial conditions still persist to some degree, notwithstanding the recent policy rate cuts.
Credit supply remains tight and a significant part of the credit demand by firms can be attributed to debt restructuring.
Therefore, the role of the credit channel in facilitating economic activity remains limited.
Developments in credit markets are closely monitored as a coincident indicator for economic activity and also in terms of their importance for the transmission of monetary policy.
It is worth to mention that a critical assumption underlying the inflation and monetary policy outlook outlined above is that government fiscal stance will remain neutral in cyclically adjusted terms.
In other words, the baseline scenario envisages that government expenditures will evolve in line with the official projections, while tax revenues will moderate as implied by the cyclical downturn.
Any significant deviation from this framework may lead to a revision in the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
In this context, the Committee underscored the importance of maintaining the smooth functioning of the financial system and the efficient operation of credit markets, and reached a consensus on implementing additional measures regarding the foreign exchange liquidity.
The Committee noted that the rise in the public sector borrowing requirement throughout the year 2009 could undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy by weakening the impact of policy decisions over the longer end of the yield curve.
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and structural reform agenda is critical for facilitating expectations management and also for enhancing the simulative impact of the monetary accommodation.
In this respect, commitment to the European Union accession process, and timely implementation and revision of the structural reforms envisaged in the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices decreased by 0.34 percent in February, pushing inflation down to 7.73 percent year-on-year.
The marked slowdown in economic activity and the changes in oil and other commodity prices continued to help bring inflation down and curb short-term exchange rate pass-through.
Energy prices dropped by 0.82 percent in February, and annual inflation in this subgroup eased to 13.74 percent, chiefly owing to falling natural gas and solid fuel prices.
Yet, the exchange rate-driven sharp rise in fuel and bottled gas prices limited the downtrend in energy price inflation.
The rate of increase in unprocessed food prices was up by a very modest 0.85 percent in February.
Accordingly, after having soared because of the sharp rise in vegetable prices over the past four months, unprocessed food price inflation slumped to 0.63 percent year-on-year owing to the dramatic decline in fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
Meanwhile, processed food prices continued to decline at a faster pace.
The group’s prices dropped by 0.68 percent month- on-month, largely due to falling bread and grain prices.
With the significant softening in both processed and unprocessed food prices, annual food and nonalcoholic beverages inflation fell to 6.16 percent.
The annual rate of increase in processed food prices is expected to slow down further in coming months.
However, changes in vegetable prices may cause a temporary spike in unprocessed food prices during March.
Committee (the Committee) noted that the anticipated rise in unprocessed food prices, as well as the observed increase in prices of tobacco products in March, would likely have an adverse impact on consumer inflation, yet will not cause any deterioration in the underlying inflation trend as price hikes in both groups are expected to be short-lived.
Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food increased by 0.46 points from January to 5.20 percent in February on the back of changes in clothing and gold prices.
However, in the durables group (excluding gold), annual inflation went down by 0.18 points month-on-month.
Producer prices for durable goods fell for the third consecutive month, partly due to changes in import prices, while aggregate demand conditions continued to soften.
As a result, exchange rate pass-through on prices of durable goods remained low compared to previous periods.
The reduction in the Special Consumption Tax (SCT) in March is likely to have some downward pressure on the prices of durable goods in March and April, but is expected to be offset by price increases as the tax cut expires in the middle of June.
Therefore, the SCT tax cut is expected to have only a temporary direct impact on inflation.
Similarly, the SCT tax cut may cause a temporary downward shift in core inflation indicators as well.
Services prices recorded the first monthly decline since the inception of the index, albeit a modest one, and the group’s annual inflation dropped by 0.62 points from January to 9.27 percent in February.
The fact that the slowdown was evident across all subcategories is viewed as a favorable development.
The continued fall in the rate of increase in services prices and other key price indicators suggests that underlying inflation is on a downward trend.
Overall, the Committee expects annual consumer inflation to rise temporarily in March owing to soaring unprocessed food prices, but then to continue its downtrend.
Industrial production, which dropped by 21.3 percent year-on-year in January 2009, displayed a sharp contraction from a month ago in seasonally adjusted terms.
Readings on capacity utilization, electricity consumption and exports point to a further significant year-on-year decline in industrial production in February.
Seasonally adjusted data for January and February indicate that economic activity continues to decline in the first quarter.
Recent data releases indicate that consumer sentiment has recovered somewhat from a quarter ago but remains subdued.
Although automobile sales and consumer confidence indices displayed a partial rebound in the first months of 2009, these indicators remain at relatively depressed levels by historical standards.
Low production figures despite rebounding orders and sales reflect the ongoing depletion of inventories.
Labor market readings confirm the sharp weakening of economic activity.
Between November 2008 and January 2009, unemployment increased by 3 points from a year earlier to 13.6 percent.
In the same period, non-farm unemployment rose by 4.3 points to 17.3 percent.
The Committee noted that the rise in unemployment is partly due to increased labor force participation, but emphasized that the main driver was the slowdown in employment growth.
The number of people receiving unemployment benefits continued to rise in February and it is evident that it will take some time for economic activity to recover.
These developments suggest that unemployment will increase further during the first quarter.
On balance, the downward pressure on unit labor costs will continue.
Foreign demand continues to remain weak in the first quarter.
Although data released by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly and leading indicators for export orders indicate no further deterioration in February and March, the Committee, in view of the global economic outlook, expects that aggregate demand is not likely to recover soon.
Recent monetary and fiscal policy actions are likely to provide some stimulus to domestic demand, accelerating the depletion of inventories and thus partially adding to the exchange rate pass-through on the prices of durable goods.
However, the Committee underscored that monetary policy would not react to changes in relative prices stemming from exchange rate movements, as long as it does not lead to a deterioration in overall price setting behavior.
Second round effects should not be a source of concern at this point, given the significant weakness in non-farm employment and the economic outlook.
The Committee indicated that the rate cuts so far had lowered the probability of significantly undershooting the end-year inflation target, and hence the next rate cut might be measured.
However, it was also stated that tightness in financial conditions still persisted to some extent, and uncertainties regarding the impact of financial turbulence on the real economy remained high, suggesting that downside risks still remained.
Although consumer credits and other domestic demand indicators suggest a slight rebound, business loans continue to stagnate.
Problems in international credit markets persist while forecasts of global economic growth have been consistently revised downwards.
The global economic outlook continues to deteriorate and the recession is expected to be long lasting.
In this respect, the Committee members indicated that the likelihood of an early recovery in the global economy, envisaged as an alternative scenario in the January Inflation Report, had almost diminished.
Therefore, expecting that economic activity is not likely to recover anytime soon, the Committee stated that it might be necessary for monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a considerable period.
The Committee members suggested that the reduced global appetite for risk and the expected slowdown in capital flows to emerging markets could be taken into account regarding monetary policy decisions.
Yet, it was emphasized that the sharp contraction in investment demand and the rapidly shrinking current account deficit led to a significant drop in financing requirements.
The Committee members have noted that budget revenues have been declining in line with the slowdown in economic activity while expenditures have been accelerating due to counter cyclical fiscal policy.
It was stated that some easing in fiscal policy is understandable under the current conditions.
However, the Committee indicated that the increasing financing requirement of the government might weaken the impact of monetary policy decisions on economic activity.
Accordingly, in order to reap the gains from short-term expansionary fiscal policy, it is important to commit to a credible medium-term fiscal framework that would ensure debt sustainability and a sound overall fiscal position.
Prudent monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient to maintain the resilience of the economy against the global crisis.
Therefore, strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also critical for facilitating expectations management and for enhancing the simulative impact of the monetary accommodation.
Consumer prices increased by 1.1 percent in March, pushing inflation up to 7.89 percent year-on-year, largely due to the sharp rise in unprocessed food prices, as stated in the press releases from the .
Committee (MPC) last month.
Unprocessed food prices were up 8.58 percent in March, and annual inflation in this category climbed to 10.20 percent.
After rising at a more moderate pace in the first two months of 2009 as compared to previous years, fresh fruit and vegetable prices soared by a remarkable 16.99 percent in March, far beyond seasonal patterns, owing to unfavorable weather conditions and the relative increase in foreign demand for these products.
Meanwhile, the annual rate of increase in processed food prices continued to fall in March because of the decline in bread and grain prices driven by lower wheat prices, and annual processed food inflation dropped by 3.2 percentage points to 8.30 percent.
In sum, with the steep increase in unprocessed food prices, annual food and nonalcoholic beverages inflation surged to 9.18 percent in March from 6.16 percent in February, despite falling processed food prices.
Energy prices were nearly unchanged in March, and annual inflation in this category eased to 12.59 percent.
The marked slowdown in solid fuel prices during the past two months continued into March, while fuel prices increased due to rising exchange rates and crude oil prices.
However, despite the recent uptick, current crude oil prices are still well below their year-ago levels, suggesting that the annual rate of increase in energy prices will continue to slow down in the short run.
Prices of goods excluding energy and food remained flat in March.
Although prices of tobacco products increased by 7.34 percent, annual inflation in this category dropped by about 1 percentage point to 4.23 percent on the back of the cuts in the Special Consumption Taxes (SCT) in durable goods and the softening in annual clothing inflation.
In the durable goods subcategory (excluding gold), prices dropped by 3.95 percent, while annual inflation slumped to –0.95 percent.
With the SCT tax cut, prices of automobiles and white goods fell by 6.37 and 6.85 percent, respectively.
Moreover, the three- month Value Added Tax (VAT) cut on furniture and IT products announced in April will put some additional temporary downward pressure on durable goods inflation.
However, the Committee noted that exchange rate movements might have a lagged impact on prices of durable goods following the depletion of inventories.
The slowdown in services prices that started in the final quarter of 2008 continued into March, and annual services inflation fell by around 1 percentage point to 8.29 percent.
With the lagged impact of the sharp contraction in domestic demand, the rate of increase in services prices eased across all subcategories.
In particular, annual rent inflation continued to fall at a more solid pace.
The decline in the core inflation measures since the fourth quarter of 2008 continued into March, which resulted from the downtrend in underlying inflation and, partly, from the SCT tax cuts in March.
Yet, even without the contribution of tax cuts, underlying inflation is still falling.
Apart from the SCT tax cut, the VAT cut, effective in April, will also put some downward pressure on core inflation.
However, it should be emphasized again that this impact will most likely disappear by the time these tax cuts expire, which are therefore expected to cause fluctuations in the core inflation measures over the short run.
Overall, the downtrend in inflation became more pronounced in the first quarter of 2009 on the back of the sharp contraction in economic activity.
Furthermore, owing to the cumulative decline in oil and other commodity prices, inflation is expected to decelerate at a more rapid pace in the short run.
Recent readings suggest that economic activity continued to weaken in the first quarter of 2009.
In this period, domestic demand fell rapidly, while foreign demand remained subdued.
Accordingly, industrial production shrunk by 22.5 percent year-on-year during the January-February period.
Moreover, the contraction, in seasonally adjusted terms, was deeper than the previous quarter.
Recent data releases indicate that tax cuts on selected goods, which are part of the fiscal package, helped to stimulate domestic sales.
Domestic automobile sales rose by a record 82 percent month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms and recorded the first yearly increase since May 2008.
Similarly, domestic demand indicators such as imports of consumer goods and domestic sales of household appliances were significantly higher in March.
The Committee indicated that the partial rebound in consumer demand does not point to a long-lasting recovery, and is rather a result of the price incentives created by the fiscal package that brought consumer demand for selected goods forward.
Foreign demand remains weak as of the first quarter.
Because of slowing economic activity and falling energy prices, imports dropped at a more rapid pace than exports and the foreign trade deficit kept narrowing dramatically since the third quarter of 2008.
Thus, the Committee members noted that there is an increasingly lower external financing need given the positive current account balance.
The Committee pointed to the negative implications of the economic contraction for the labor market.
The slowdown in non-farm employment growth has intensified during the December 2008 and February 2009 period.
Accordingly, non-farm unemployment increased by 5.3 percentage points from a year earlier to 19 percent in this period, and total unemployment rose by 3.9 percentage points to 15.5 percent.
Increasing labor force participation partly contributed to the surge in unemployment rates.
On balance, the rise in unemployment rates is expected to put further downward pressure on disposable income and unit labor costs for quite some time.
In view of recent readings, the Committee indicated that the rate of growth might register a double-digit decline in the first quarter of 2009.
Yet, confidence indices and coincident indicators of demand expectations suggest that the economy may start to recover slightly by the second quarter of the year.
The Committee reviewed the forecasts and the underlying assumptions to be published in the Inflation Report on April 30th.
Committee members indicated that international credit markets continued to be under strain and that there were no clear signs of a durable improvement in the global economic outlook.
In the January Inflation Report, it was assumed that the recovery in the global economy would start at the beginning of 2010.
However, data releases since then have indicated a sharper contraction in 2009, and a more gradual recovery throughout 2010.
Therefore, compared to the previous report, the revised forecasts are based on a deeper downturn in 2009, and a more gradual recovery in the global economy.
In light of these assessments, the Committee concluded that the probability attached to the early recovery scenario in the January Inflation Report has diminished considerably.
It was therefore agreed that, besides revising the baseline scenario, it would be appropriate to present an alternative scenario that envisages a more gradual recovery than in the baseline.
During the last quarter of 2008, the collapse of production has been disproportionately severe for export-oriented firms, and—along with increasing labor force participation rates—has brought about a surge in the unemployment rate.
Moreover, recent indicators suggest that employment losses have continued during the first quarter of 2009.
Therefore, labor market conditions are expected to contain unit labor costs and curb domestic demand in the period ahead.
Lower policy rates and expansionary fiscal policy have started to provide some stimulus to domestic demand.
However, the Committee anticipates that it will take some time for the global economy to stabilize and thus the recovery in aggregate domestic activity is expected to be gradual.
Accordingly, Committee members stated that aggregate demand conditions should support disinflation more forcefully, and for a longer period of time than envisaged in the previous Report.
In light of these assessments and the partial improvement in some risk indicators, the Committee has decided to cut policy rates by 75 basis points.
The Committee has indicated that the rate cuts have lowered the probability of significantly undershooting the end-year inflation target.
Therefore, it was stated that the next rate cut would likely be measured.
However, financial strains persist, and there is still a significant amount of uncertainty regarding the feedback between the financial and real sectors, suggesting that downside risks still remain.
In this respect, the Committee envisages that it may be necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a considerable period.
The stance of fiscal policy is another major factor that may affect the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
Recently, budget revenues have been declining in line with the slowdown in economic activity, while expenditures have been accelerating due to countercyclical fiscal policy, leading to a significant rise in the budget deficit.
Possible adjustments in excise taxes and/or administered prices in order to stabilize the budget could result some inflation volatility over the short term.
Moreover, the increasing financing requirement of the government might weaken the favorable impact of monetary policy decisions on economic activity.
The Committee members hence reiterated that, in order to reap the gains from short-term expansionary fiscal policy, it was important to commit to a credible medium-term fiscal framework that would ensure fiscal discipline and debt sustainability.
Central Bank of Turkey will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy, provided that they do not conflict with the price stability objective.
Therefore, strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also critical for facilitating expectations management and for supporting the effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions.
In this respect, commitment to the European Union accession process, and timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged in the Pre-Accession Economic Program remain to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices increased by 0.02 percent in April, while inflation fell to 6.13 percent year-on-year.
Annual inflation was down month-on-month across all major categories, suggesting a more broad-based deceleration in inflation owing to the significant slowdown in economic activity.
Unprocessed food prices were down 0.95 percent in April because of declining fruit and vegetable prices.
Yet, annual inflation in this category rose month-on- month, albeit modestly, to 10.87 percent in April.
Foreign demand for fruits and vegetables has been relatively increasing since the final quarter of 2008.
In fact, the quantity of exported fruits and vegetables grew by an average of 25.2 percent in the first quarter as compared to a year earlier, which partially offset the downward pressure on their prices owing to increased production.
On the other hand, annual processed food inflation decreased further to 4.99 percent.
As a result, annual food and nonalcoholic beverages inflation dropped to 7.70 percent.
Energy prices decreased by 1.42 percent in April amid reduced electricity tariffs and falling bottled gas, solid fuel and fuel prices.
Accordingly, the rate of increase in energy prices fell to 9.31 percent year-on-year.
The reduction in gas tariffs should help further slow the rate of increase in energy prices and thereby is expected to push consumer inflation down by 0.3 percentage points in May.
Given the current level of oil prices, the yearly rate of increase in energy prices could continue to slide in coming months.
Annual inflation in prices of goods excluding energy and food dropped by 2.17 percentage points in April to 2.06 percent, largely due to prices of durable goods (excluding gold) which fell by 4.43 percent on the back of Special Consumption Tax (SCT) and Value-Added Tax (VAT) cuts.
The effects of the tax cuts were most pronounced during March and April.
Across the sub- categories, the prices of furniture, automobiles and white goods fell by 7.63, 5 and 2.74 percent, respectively.
Accordingly, inflation in durable goods plunged to –5.96 percent year-on-year.
However, it must be emphasized again that these tax cuts would only have a short-lived favorable effect on inflation as they are due to expire in the following months.
Services prices continue to fall amid the sharp contraction in domestic demand and also because of the lagged effects of weakening cost pressures.
The yearly rate of increase in services prices slumped to a historic low of 7.61 percent in April.
The decline was evident across all subcategories of services.
Annual services inflation is expected to edge further down in coming months.
Core inflation measures continue to trend downward, largely owing to the tax cuts that have been in place over the past two months.
Put differently, the recent sharp declines in the core inflation measures have been primarily driven by the tax cuts, and therefore the rapid slowdown in these measures is expected to be temporary.
However, even without the contribution of these tax cuts, core inflation measures still declined, supporting the view that inflation is still continuing on a downward path.
Committee (the Committee) expects inflation to decelerate further in the short run due to the softening in economic activity and the past declines in oil and other commodity prices.
The latest data for the first quarter of 2009 confirmed the continuing sharp contraction in economic activity.
Industrial production shrunk by 22 percent year-on-year in this period and declined at a faster pace than in the fourth quarter of 2008 in seasonally adjusted terms.
Similarly, domestic investment demand contracted dramatically during the first quarter of the year.
In seasonally adjusted terms, production and imports of investment goods and sales of heavy commercial vehicles fell sharply quarter- on-quarter.
In view of the low levels of resource utilization, and against the backdrop of the ongoing uncertainty regarding the global economy, the Committee expects investment demand to remain weak for quite some time.
Recent data releases indicate that there may be some rebound in private consumer demand.
The tax cuts that have been implemented as part of the fiscal package to help stimulate the economy have accelerated the depletion of inventories since March.
In April, the tax cuts had a partial effect on the production of transport vehicles and machinery and equipment, which account for a significant share of the manufacturing industry.
In fact, domestic sales of automobiles were much stronger in April than their first-quarter average in seasonally adjusted terms.
Moreover, consumer confidence indices have also gained some ground.
Yet, the Committee members noted that some of the rebound in domestic demand could be attributed to the price incentives created by the fiscal package that brought consumer demand for selected goods forward, and therefore, the pace and scale of the recovery in domestic demand remains to be seen.
The private sector’s capacity utilization rate rose month-on-month in April for the first time in a long time in seasonally adjusted terms, suggesting that the rise in domestic sales have started to support production.
In addition, the recent rebound in the business confidence index signals the possibility of a partial recovery of economic activity going forward.
Although there have been signs of a partial recovery in economic activity, there is no sign of improvement in labor market conditions.
Applications for unemployment benefits remain high, indicating that unemployment continues to increase.
On balance, the decline in non-farm employment and the high level of the unemployment rate are both expected to put further downward pressure on domestic demand and unit labor costs in the upcoming period.
Foreign demand remains weak.
Exports continued to fall during the first quarter of 2009 due to global recession.
Furthermore, coincident indicators for April and May exports do not point to a durable recovery in foreign demand.
Although the Business Tendency Survey has shown a partial recovery regarding expectations for foreign demand more recently, foreign demand conditions are not expected to improve significantly without a lasting improvement in the global economic outlook.
In light of these assessments, economic activity and employment are not expected to recover anytime soon, suggesting that downward pressures on inflation are expected to last going forward.
Accordingly, the Committee indicated that these recent developments are consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report and has thus decided to cut policy rates by 50 basis points.
The Committee believes that the rate cuts have lowered the probability of significantly undershooting the medium-term inflation targets.
Recently, improvement in global risk perceptions and expectations regarding the future course of policy rates have also contributed to the decline in longer-term interest rates to historically low levels.
In this context, it should be highlighted that changes in monetary conditions affect economic activity and inflation with a lag.
Therefore, given the cumulative easing in monetary policy since November 2008, the Committee envisages that the next rate cut may be measured.
However, the tightness in financial conditions still persist to some extent, and uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems across financial markets on the real economy are ongoing, suggesting that downside risks still remain.
Although recent indicators regarding the global economic outlook suggests that the worst may be over, it will nonetheless take some time before the global financial system recovers, and therefore a full recovery in economic activity is not likely to be observed anytime soon.
Accordingly, it seems necessary for monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a considerable period of time.
Another major factor affecting inflation and monetary policy outlook is the stance of fiscal policy.
Budget revenues continue to decline in line with the slowdown in economic activity, while expenditures rise owing to countercyclical fiscal policy, leading to a widening in the budget deficit.
The increasing financing requirement of the government might weaken the favorable impact of monetary policy decisions on economic activity.
The Committee members hence reiterated that, in order to reap the gains from short-term expansionary fiscal policy, it was important to commit to a credible medium-term fiscal framework that would underpin fiscal discipline and debt sustainability.
Consumer prices increased by 0.64 percent in May, while inflation fell to 5.24 percent year-on-year.
Inflation was down across all subcategories, with services prices registering an even more pronounced deceleration.
Moreover, the core inflation measures indicate that underlying inflation remains around historic lows.
Annual unprocessed food inflation continued to trend upward in May amid accelerating fruit prices.
After having declined as low as 0.63 percent in February, annual unprocessed food inflation spiked to 13.59 percent in May, and is likely to remain volatile in coming months.
Meanwhile, after hitting a record 25.50 percent in July 2008—amid supply shortages and rising import prices—annual processed food inflation went down to 2.68 percent in May with the reversal of previous unfavorable developments.
Accordingly, inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages dropped to 7.63 percent year-on-year.
Annual energy inflation declined by 3.1 percentage points to 6.22 percent in May due to the significant reduction in natural gas tariffs and the ongoing fall in solid fuel prices since December.
Given the removal of the base effect from the marked increase in all subcategories of energy—particularly in electricity and natural gas—during July and August 2008, annual energy inflation is expected to decelerate further in the short run.
However, higher crude oil prices are likely to limit the downtrend in energy inflation.
Annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food fell to 1.44 percent in May, owing to the decline in underlying inflation, the slower price increases for the latest season of clothing and footwear compared to a year earlier, and the high base in furniture prices from a year ago.
The impact of the tax adjustments in June on core goods inflation would depend on the extent to which they are passed through prices.
Services inflation continued to slow down in May, falling by 0.83 percentage points to 6.78 percent year-on-year.
The rate of increase of services prices decelerated across all subcategories.
Meanwhile, rent inflation moderated further, down to 9.49 percent year-on-year.
Given the softening in domestic demand, annual services inflation is expected to edge further down in coming months.
Committee (the Committee) expects annual inflation to rise in June due to the base effect and the tax adjustments.
However, the increase in inflation is seen to be temporary given the one-off nature of the factors affecting June inflation.
Recent data releases point to a partial recovery in economic activity.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the industrial production index in April and the capacity utilization rate in May indicate that the downward trend in production that began in the second quarter of 2008 ended during the second quarter of 2009.
While industrial production plummeted by 18.5 percent year-on-year, the index rose by 0.5 percent month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms in April.
Furthermore, the private sector’s capacity utilization rate in seasonally adjusted terms was up by 1.0 percentage point during April-May period compared to the first quarter.
Nonetheless, the Committee members noted that most of the recent increases in economic activity were attributable to the short-term effects of the previously implemented fiscal measures.
The Committee indicated that there needs to be a robust revival in consumer demand in order for the increases in the capacity utilization rate to be sustainable over the medium term.
Although consumer demand continued to rise in April and in May, it remains to be seen whether this will turn into a solid recovery.
The Committee noted that consumer demand was stronger in the second quarter than in the first quarter of the year in seasonally adjusted terms.
Specifically, domestic automobile sales, which were largely supported by the tax cuts, continued to rise in May in seasonally adjusted terms, leading to an increase both in imports and domestic production.
The fiscal package also affected the domestic sales of white goods, which accelerated during March and April.
Similarly, consumption indices remained elevated in April and May after markedly rising during March.
Having started to rebound in February, the production of chemicals and furniture production, largely intended for the domestic market, continued to recover slightly in April.
Despite having fallen significantly year-on-year, imports of consumer goods increased in seasonally adjusted terms during March and April, particularly owing to the rebound in imports of passenger cars on the back of the tax cut introduced by the fiscal package.
In contrast, the recovery in consumer non- durable imports was quite limited.
Domestic investment demand continues to contract.
The production of capital goods fell in April in seasonally adjusted terms, while there has been some recovery in capital goods imports since February.
According to both production and import figures, the investment demand for machinery and equipment is expected to slump further year-on-year in the second quarter.
Demand uncertainty and lower capacity utilization continue to suppress fixed capital investments.
Results of the Business Survey indicate that recently investment appetite continued to remain weak, although the pace of deterioration has slowed down during April and May.
The Committee indicated that the current trend in investment demand is far from signaling a robust economic recovery.
The export quantity index dropped by 13.3 percent year-on-year in April.
Coincident indicators suggest that exports decreased by about 40 percent year-on-year in May in US dollar terms.
The Committee noted that the sharp contraction in exports during May can be partly attributed to base effects, as the seasonally adjusted data shows that exports have remained flat since October 2008.
The softening of economic activity in general, and investment demand in particular, continues to have a dampening effect on employment.
Although non-farm unemployment declined to 18.9 percent in March 2009 after hitting 19.3 percent during the first quarter of 2009, it continued to rise in seasonally adjusted terms.
Applications for unemployment benefits in April and May suggest that non-farm unemployment may continue to rise in the second quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
The Committee expects that the high rate of unemployment would restrain unit labor costs and domestic demand in the foreseeable future.
The Committee believes that resolving the problems in the global economy is likely to take a considerable period of time.
Although recent data releases indicate that the worst may be over, the recovery is expected to be protracted given credit market problems and rising unemployment rates.
In light of these assessments, the Committee expects that the recovery in domestic economic activity would be gradual, and labor market conditions would not improve anytime soon.
Hence, the inflation rate is expected to remain at low levels in the forthcoming period.
While inflation could rise in June due to tax hikes and base effects, this increase is expected to be temporary.
Changes in monetary conditions affect economic activity and inflation with a lag.
Although downside risks are still more significant, recent signs of recovery in economic activity should not be discarded.
Accordingly, the Committee will consider a deceleration in the pace of rate cuts or a pause should the indications of an improvement in economic activity point to a robust recovery.
The Committee also assessed current and projected Turkish lira liquidity conditions.
To facilitate the liquidity management of banks and to enhance the transmission of monetary policy, the Committee approved the use of repos up to three-month maturity as needed, in addition to the main one-week repo funding instrument.
The Committee indicated that despite recent increases, commodity prices are still at low levels relative to last year, and therefore imported input costs did not exert significant pressure on inflation at this point.
At the same time, the Committee members noted that the possible future demand increases for commodities by emerging economies, including China and India, made commodity prices very sensitive to speculation.
Therefore, potential commodity price developments could present risks to inflation over the medium term.
Another major factor affecting inflation and the monetary policy outlook is the stance of fiscal policy.
Revenues continue to decline in line with the slowdown in economic activity, while expenditures rise owing to countercyclical fiscal policy, leading to a widening in the budget deficit.
In this context, the increasing financing requirement of the government might weaken the favorable impact of monetary policy decisions on economic activity.
Given these developments, the Committee members once again emphasized that, in order to reap the gains from short-term expansionary fiscal policy, it was important to commit to a credible medium-term fiscal framework that would underpin fiscal discipline and debt sustainability.
While necessary, prudent monetary policy is not sufficient to support the resilience of the economy against the global crisis.
Consumer prices increased by 0.11 percent in June, bringing inflation up to 5.73 percent year-on-year.
The rise in inflation was primarily driven by the base effect from unprocessed food prices and tax adjustments on some durable goods.
However, excluding the contributions of these factors, underlying inflation continues to trend down, hovering around historic lows.
Annual unprocessed food inflation increased in June mainly on account of the low base effect.
It should be recalled that unprocessed food prices had dropped by about 10 percent in June 2008 at a faster pace than seasonal averages, largely owing to the decline in exports for fruits and vegetables.
Having fallen at a more modest pace in June 2009, unprocessed food prices registered an annual rate of increase of 22.35 percent, partly owing to the increase in foreign demand for fruits and vegetables since the final quarter of 2008.
After hitting an average of 25.2 percent year-on-year in the first quarter, the growth in export quantity for fruits and vegetables climbed to about 35 percent during April and May.
Meanwhile, processed food prices continued to ease in June, running close to year-ago levels.
Despite the benign outlook for processed food prices, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages group rose to 9.68 percent owing to developments in unprocessed food prices.
Energy prices rose by 1.63 percent in June on the back of rising fuel and bottled gas prices amid higher oil prices.
Despite these price hikes, the annual rate of increase in energy prices continued to decline, bringing energy inflation down to 6.1 percent year-on-year.
Fuel prices declined during the first half of July, owing to regulatory measures and the fall in oil prices, before rising again on the back of special consumption tax (SCT) hike on major fuel products and the rise in oil prices.
On balance, monthly average of fuel prices in July are expected to be below average fuel prices in June.
Along with the removal of the high base effect from the sharp increase in electricity tariffs a year ago, annual energy inflation is expected to decline further in July.
Although annual inflation in goods excluding energy and food rose in June, it still remains low at 1.63 percent.
Among the subcategories, clothing prices remained below year-ago levels.
Prices of durable goods (excluding gold) were up 2.04 percent month-on-month due to phased-out tax cuts, with a particular boost from rising automobile prices.
It should be noted that changes in tax rates are likely to put further upward pressure on core goods inflation in July and October.
In addition, the surge in prices of tobacco products (fuelled by minimum lump-sum tax adjustments) is likely to push CPI inflation up by around 0.54 percentage points in July.
On balance, the annual rate of increase in prices of goods excluding food and energy is expected to edge up in the second half of 2009.
The rate of increase in services prices continued to slow down amid weakening domestic demand.
Services inflation fell by 0.51 percentage points month-on-month to an all-time low of 6.27 percent year-on-year.
Annual inflation decelerated across all major subcategories.
In particular, rent inflation eased further, down to 8.74 percent year-on-year.
Accordingly, services prices are expected to edge further down in coming months.
Overall, despite some potential fluctuations owing to tax hikes and base effects, the .
Committee (the Committee) expects inflation to remain low during the upcoming period.
First-quarter national accounts data confirmed the deepening of the economic contraction.
During the first quarter, gross domestic product (GDP) plummeted by 13.8 percent year-on-year and posted a steep quarterly decline in seasonally adjusted terms.
The global crisis had a growing impact on the labor market, while private domestic demand displayed a sharp contraction.
However, with the marked slowdown in imports, net exports registered a positive contribution to growth.
Despite having slumped by 17.4 percent year-on-year, industrial production increased in seasonally adjusted terms in May.
However, the June data on capacity utilization suggests that the pace of recovery in economic activity remains weak.
The Committee noted that even though the downtrend in industrial production since the second quarter of 2008 appears to have receded in seasonally adjusted terms, the outlook for growth remains anemic.
Consumption indices seem to indicate a modest revitalization during the second quarter.
The production of consumer goods rose quarter-on-quarter, particularly regarding goods most affected by the tax cuts.
Similarly, imports of consumer goods increased on the back of the robust demand for passenger cars.
On balance, the Committee indicated that the second-quarter recovery in private consumption demand is uneven and, currently, not of a durable nature.
Domestic investment demand continues to weaken.
The production of capital goods dropped by 38.7 percent year-on-year during April-May and fell below its quarter-ago average in seasonally adjusted terms.
Meanwhile, the private investment demand for machinery and equipment has plunged further in the second quarter both in quarterly and yearly terms, although there has been some rebound in the demand for imported capital goods.
The export quantity index was down 19 percent year-on-year during April-May.
The recent readings of the export quantity index (excluding gold) point to a very slow and limited growth of underlying exports in seasonally adjusted terms, which is consistent with the current global growth outlook.
Ongoing weakness regarding the leading indicators for economic activity across European countries–comprising Turkey’s largest export destinations–increases the likelihood of a protracted recovery in foreign demand.
The demand uncertainty fuelled by the global economic downturn has prompted firms to embrace a more cautious stance regarding production activities.
In this context, employment prospects are unlikely to improve soon given the low rates of capacity utilization and the decline in investment sentiment.
The 2009 March-May data indicate that non-farm employment continues to fall, while both male and female labor force participation rates rise further.
Thus, non-farm unemployment soared to 18.2 percent during March- May, up by 5.9 percentage points from a year earlier.
While applications for unemployment benefits slowed in June compared with the first quarter, they were significantly above their year-ago level.
These developments suggest that non-farm unemployment has remained at elevated levels in the second quarter.
In light of these assessments, the Committee noted that, although there were signs of a partial improvement in domestic consumption, its strength and durability remains to be seen.
It is expected that demand uncertainty and low levels of resource utilization will continue to weigh down on investment spending and employment, while high unemployment will continue to contain private consumption demand.
Therefore, inflation is expected to remain at low levels for a long period of time.
The tightness in financial conditions continues to some extent, and uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the real economy persist, suggesting that downside risks still remain.
Therefore, the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary for monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time and envisaged that further measured rate cuts would be necessary in the near term unless a robust recovery were observed in the economic activity.
The Committee members believe that global interest rates are likely to remain at low levels for an extended period, given the significant slowdown in growth and rising saving rates.
The Committee therefore indicated that this view should be emphasized more forcefully to align market yields closer with future policy intentions.
Given the increased perceptions that low growth and low interest rates will persist for an extended period, the Committee members assessed that, it would be possible to provide more solid information regarding the policy stance in the upcoming Inflation Report (due on July 29th).
Accordingly, the Committee decided to provide a perspective on the policy rate assumptions for the short-term, medium-term, and long-term that underlies the forecasts in the Inflation Report.
The Committee reemphasized the important role of global developments as well as fiscal policy for the inflation and monetary policy outlook.
The Committee members indicated that providing explicit statements in the Inflation Report regarding the likely response of monetary policy under alternative scenarios would be useful in containing uncertainties and guiding market expectations.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms in the context of the European Union accession process remains to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices increased by 0.25 percent in July, while inflation decreased to 5.39 percent year-on-year.
Despite the fall in average inflation, core inflation measures rose on the back of the year-on-year slowdown in seasonal clothing discounts during July, and because of tax adjustments on some durable goods.
Excluding tax effects, underlying inflation continue to hover around low levels.
Despite having decelerated in July, annual unprocessed food inflation still remains elevated.
In contrast, processed food prices increased by a mere 0.33 percent in July, falling year-on-year for the first time since the inception of the consumer price index.
The annual rate of increase in processed food prices is likely to rise owing to base effects in coming months, while there may be a downward correction in unprocessed food prices.
Changes in energy prices helped annual inflation ease further.
Energy prices dropped by 0.21 percent in July, leading to a sharp decline in annual inflation, partly owing to the high base effect from a year earlier.
Crude oil prices fell month-on-month, but the fall could hardly pass through to the domestic market owing to the mid-July lump sum special consumption tax levied on major fuel products.
Given that the tax increase will be partly reflected in August inflation and noting the pick up in international oil prices, fuel prices are expected to rise in August.
The annual rate of increase in goods excluding energy and food climbed to 4.79 percent in July, largely due to tax adjustments, as stated in the previous Summary of the .
Prices of tobacco products soared by 11.57 percent due to the minimum lump sum tax adjustment, adding approximately 0.5 percentage points to July inflation.
Moreover, prices of durable goods (excluding gold) rose by 2.09 percent due to phased-out tax cuts on certain consumer goods.
Taken together, the tax adjustments pushed inflation up by around 0.7 percentage points in July.
Meanwhile, clothing prices decreased at a slower pace in July compared to a year ago owing to early seasonal discounts and a modest rise in clothing consumption.
Services inflation declined to a historic low of 5.92 percent year-on-year in July.
Across the subcategories, prices for transport services, rents, as well as restaurants and hotels increased at a more moderate pace than a year earlier.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the monthly rent inflation continued smoothly along a downward path.
At the same time, while tax measures to restore fiscal balances led to a marked increase in compulsory traffic insurance premiums and notary public fees in July, inflation in services is expected to slow further in the forthcoming period.
Committee (the Committee) noted that trend inflation is hovering around low levels and advancing along a path that is consistent with medium-term targets.
Recent data releases are in line with the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report.
Industrial production fell by 9.7 percent in June, at a more modest annual rate than in May.
Critically however, much of the improvement in the year-on-year difference was caused by calendar effects.
Accordingly, the Committee emphasized that judgments based only on annual growth rates may be misleading.
In fact, seasonally adjusted June data indicate that industrial production hardly changed month-on-month.
July data on capacity utilization show that the modest recovery in production has continued into the third quarter.
In seasonally adjusted terms, total capacity utilization increased by 0.5 percentage point month-on-month, running 1 percentage point above the second-quarter average.
The Committee noted that although private sector capacity utilization displayed some recovery during the second quarter, it still remained at relatively depressed levels.
Recent indicators for consumption confirmed that the fiscal stimulus measures had only a temporary impact on domestic demand.
Accordingly, consumption indices and domestic automobiles sales fell sharply in July, while the demand for consumer loans slowed down as well.
Expectations for domestic demand and consumer confidence indices show similar patterns.
Specifically, according to the July Business Tendency Survey, three-month-ahead expectations for the number of new orders received from the domestic market declined month-on-month.
Similarly, consumer confidence indices decreased for the first time in a long while.
The Committee indicated that these developments added to the uncertainty about the strength of recovery in consumer demand.
Domestic investment demand continues to fall.
In particular, data on capital goods indicate that machinery and equipment investments declined further in the second quarter.
More specifically, the production of capital goods dropped by 35.8 percent year-on-year in the second quarter and remained flat quarter- on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
Meanwhile, imports of investment goods fell by 18.3 percent year-on-year, but picked up in quarterly terms.
Investment expectations in the Business Tendency Survey and the demand for investment-related credit in Banks’ Loans Tendency Survey reveal similar patterns, indicating an unfavorable outlook for investment spending.
The seasonally adjusted export quantity index (excluding gold) has increased gradually during April-June period.
Data published by Turkish Exporters Assembly show that the modest growth of underlying exports continued during July and August.
The Committee reiterated that foreign demand is likely to remain anemic in the near term, as the recent signs of global economic recovery do not exhibit a strong enough recovery.
Demand uncertainty remains high, causing firms to maintain low inventory levels and embrace a more cautious stance regarding production activities, which continues to suppress investment demand and employment prospects.
In fact, there have not been any notable improvements regarding employment conditions.
Non-farm employment dropped by 2.8 percent year-on-year during the second quarter, while non-farm unemployment increased by 5.5 percentage points year-on-year to 17 percent.
In seasonally adjusted terms, non-farm employment losses are still apparent across industrial sectors and in related services including commercial and transport-communication segments.
The growing number of non-farm unemployed as well as the rise in labor participation rates led to an increase in non-farm unemployment.
Overall, recent data releases indicate that the ongoing recovery in economic activity would be gradual and protracted.
The Committee observed that despite some recent easing, tightness in financial conditions still persists.
According to the CBT Bank Loan Tendency Survey, the tightening of business loan lending standards continued—albeit at a slower pace—during the second quarter.
Moreover, the survey suggests that any support the credit channel would have regarding the recovery of economic activity would be limited during the second quarter, given that the major driver of the firms’ demand for loans has been the desire to restructure their debt obligations.
The Committee members have indicated that bond yields have fallen in line with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report, and predicted that bank lending rates for consumer loans would follow gradually, as the lagged effects of cumulative easing of 900 basis points since November 2008 would start to ease credit conditions towards the last quarter of this year.
However, the current unfavorable labor market conditions are expected to restrain the recovery in consumption, and therefore domestic demand conditions would continue to support disinflation.
Therefore, in line with the perspective outlined in the Inflation Report, inflation is expected to remain at low levels for a long period of time.
The Committee reemphasized the importance of fiscal discipline in maintaining low levels of medium- and long-term interest rates, which are key determinants regarding the recovery of both consumption and investment.
The implementation of a credible fiscal framework would bring down risk premiums further, and hence lead to a permanent fall in longer-term interest rates.
This, in turn, would foster investment and labor demand, and thereby support the recovery process.
Therefore, the establishment of a credible medium-term program ensuring fiscal discipline and debt sustainability would have an expansionary rather than contractionary impact on economic activity.
The Committee members stated that recent data regarding the global economy were consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report.
Although the data on economic activity suggest that the worst may be over, ongoing tight credit conditions and elevated unemployment rates are expected to hold back the recovery in global economy for a while.
The Committee observed that the cumulative effects of the commodity price declines has contributed to the slowdown in domestic inflation over the past year, especially by lowering processed food and energy inflation, leading to a significant base effect.
Therefore, headline inflation may increase modestly at the turn of the year through mid-2010, mainly owing to base effects, although trend inflation is expected to remain at low levels in the period ahead.
It should be underscored that a rise in inflation stemming from this channel was already factored into the monetary policy stance outlined in the July Inflation Report.
Overall, the tightness in financial conditions continues to some extent, and uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the real economy persist, suggesting that downside risks still remain.
Therefore, the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary for monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time, and envisaged that further measured rate cuts would be necessary in the short term unless there is a robust recovery in the economic activity.
The CBT has been taking the necessary measures at its disposal to contain the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic economy.
Consumer prices decreased by 0.30 percent in August, bringing inflation down to 5.33 percent year-on-year.
Core inflation measures remained low, while the annual rate of increase in the prices of services continued to fall steadily.
The rate of increase in food prices dropped by 1.67 percentage points month- on-month to 6.83 percent year-on-year, on the back of easing unprocessed food prices, owing to falling vegetable and fruit prices.
In the processed food category, prices continued to decline year-on-year, however, annual inflation across this category is likely to increase owing to base effects in coming months.
Energy prices increased by 1.88 percent in August.
Fuel prices jumped by 5.02 percent due to the lagged impact of the mid-July Special Consumption Tax hike and rising oil prices.
Moreover, the increase in tap water rates drove energy prices higher.
The annual rate of increase in the prices of goods excluding energy and food climbed to 5.70 percent in August, owing to the rise in annual clothing inflation and the monthly increase (1.83 percent) in prices of durable goods (excluding gold) and tobacco products.
The seasonal discounts on clothing prices have been more modest than a year earlier because of the relative increase in clothing demand.
Meanwhile, the annual inflation in durable goods (excluding gold) increased to –1.71 percent amid rising prices of white goods and automobiles.
It should be noted that the tax cuts are due to expire in October, which will likely put upward pressure on annual durable goods inflation in the upcoming period.
Given the weak state of domestic demand and the gradual removal of the high base effect of the past supply shocks, the steady fall in services prices over the past year continued into August, bringing the inflation rate in this category down to 5.59 percent year-on-year.
Across subcategories, inflation in transport services, rents, as well as restaurants and hotels continued to fall gradually.
Annual services inflation is expected to edge further down over the short run.
Committee (the Committee) noted that underlying inflation continues to hover around low levels.
Second quarter national accounts data are consistent with the outlook discussed in the July Inflation Report.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) continued to decline year-on-year, but rose sharply quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, signaling that the economic contraction since the second quarter of 2008 has ended.
Domestic demand increased on rising private consumption during the second quarter, and net exports continued to register a positive contribution to growth, albeit more modestly.
As stated in the Central Bank of Turkey’s previous publications and announcements, the Committee reiterated that consumer spending was mainly boosted by the fiscal stimulus packages, and thus the observed recovery may reflect transitory features.
Among major spending categories, the demand for goods that benefited from the fiscal measures recovered rapidly during the second quarter: spending on furniture, household appliances and care, as well as transport and communications rose markedly quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
By contrast, the demand for categories that were not affected by the fiscal incentives remained flat.
Consumption demand, after having increased markedly during the second quarter, is expected to display a weaker course in the third quarter.
In fact, indicators including the sales of white goods, the quantity of imported consumer goods, consumption indices and automobile sales are running below their second quarter levels in seasonally adjusted terms.
Moreover, the indicators of market orders and consumer confidence from the Business Tendency Survey seem to reinforce this outlook.
Domestic investment demand remains weak.
Despite the marked run-up in consumer demand during the second quarter, private machinery and equipment investments continued to fall quarterly, indicating that demand uncertainty remains strong over the upcoming periods.
Imports of capital goods declined in July from a quarter earlier, while the Business Tendency Survey indicator of expected future fixed capital investment spending points to a further year-on-year decline in private sector investments.
The Committee noted that low capacity utilization rates and uncertainties over aggregate demand will likely further weigh down on investment demand.
Foreign demand continues to be weak.
The export quantity index continued to fall year-on-year in July, but increased sharply month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms.
Leading indicators suggest that exports continued to grow in August and September, albeit at a slower pace.
The Committee noted that exports are expected to recover gradually, matching the pace of global economic recovery, and reemphasized that foreign demand is therefore likely to remain anemic for quite some time.
In July, industrial production increased month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms, running above its second quarter average.
The uptrend in capacity utilization rates since April continued into August.
The manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate and recent export data suggest that the moderate recovery in industrial production is likely to continue into August and September.
Uncertainties regarding aggregate demand remain high and continue to adversely affect labor markets.
Specifically, labor market conditions do not display a significant improvement.
During May-July, non-farm employment dropped by 2.5 percent year-on-year, while non-farm unemployment increased by 4.5 percentage points to 16.4 percent.
In seasonally adjusted terms, while non-farm unemployment fell slightly quarter-on-quarter, the decline was because of a drop in labor participation rate rather than a recovery in employment.
Moreover, employment losses are still apparent across industrial sectors in seasonally adjusted terms, indicating that the labor market has yet to recover.
Looking ahead, leading indicators do not point to a marked recovery in employment conditions during the third quarter.
Committee members have indicated that the future course of monetary policy will largely depend on the strength of the recovery in economic activity.
Although second quarter GDP figures seem to reflect a bounce-back in private consumption, inspection of the subcomponents reveals that the increase in consumption is confined to goods that were subject to tax incentives within the fiscal package, suggesting that a durable recovery has yet to materialize.
As a matter of fact, recent data releases indicate that, in line with the Committee’s previous assessments, the ongoing recovery in economic activity will be gradual and protracted.
Accordingly, resource utilization in the economy is anticipated to stay below potential for an extended period, and therefore, in line with the perspective outlined in the Inflation Report, inflation is expected to remain at low levels for a long period of time.
Provided that the improvements in global risk perceptions continue, the Committee expects that the cumulative policy rate cuts implemented since November 2008 would begin to have an effect on credit markets over the forthcoming period.
In this context, consumer loan rates have been falling steadily since the publication of the July Inflation Report.
Also during this period, banks’ willingness to extend credits have been increasing markedly, and tightness in financial conditions have been easing.
These developments suggest that the credit channel would start to be more effective going forward.
However, the weakness in labor markets is ongoing and lingering problems across the global economy have not been resolved completely, suggesting that there are still uncertainties regarding the strength of the recovery.
In this respect, the Committee members stated that the improvement in credit conditions would not in itself be enough to end the easing cycle.
Yet, given the increased perceptions that the economy had reached a turning point, it was concluded that a slowdown in the pace of rate cuts might be considered, keeping the options open depending on incoming information.
Overall, the Committee has reiterated that it would be necessary for monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time.
The size and the duration of the rate cuts would depend on the pace of the recovery in economic activity.
Another factor affecting the outlook for monetary policy would be changes in risk perceptions.
The global crisis has highlighted the resilience of the Turkish financial system, leading to an improvement of our relative creditworthiness.
Provided that the global risk appetite continues to improve in the forthcoming period, this could lead to a decline in imported inflation through the portfolio channel, increasing the probability of significantly undershooting the inflation targets.
Under such circumstances, the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) would react by extending the easing cycle more than was envisaged in the Inflation Report.
An important factor that may affect the risk premium is fiscal policy.
Should the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program be supported by structural adjustments which enhance fiscal discipline, the improvements in sovereign credit risk might continue, which in turn, would increase the probability of a further decline in interest rates.
In sum, further improvements in the risk premium may lead to a longer rate cut cycle.
Monetary policy in the past year has focused on alleviating the impact of the global financial crisis on the economic activity.
In this respect, the CBT has delivered sizeable cuts in policy rates, while providing liquidity support to facilitate the smooth operation of credit and financial markets.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program and European Union accession process remains to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices increased by 0.39 percent in September, while inflation declined to 5.27 percent year-on-year.
Core inflation measures remained subdued, whereas the annual rate of increase in services prices continued to fall steadily.
Annual inflation in food prices dropped slightly over the month to 6.79 percent.
The favorable course of fruit and vegetable prices during the past two months continued into September, while meat prices accelerated further.
Taken together, unprocessed food inflation eased to 16.70 percent year-on-year.
In the processed food category, prices continued to fall year-on-year.
Looking ahead, fruit and vegetable prices are expected to pick up owing to seasonal factors in October, while processed food prices are likely to remain on the decline.
Energy prices rose by 0.63 percent in September amid rising tap water rates and bottled gas prices.
Accordingly, the rate of increase in energy prices climbed to 2.01 percent year-on-year.
The hike in electricity tariffs, effective October 1, would add about 0.4 percentage points to CPI inflation.
The annual rate of increase in prices of goods excluding energy and food declined to 5.52 percent, owing to ongoing discounts on clothing and footwear in September, in contrast with previous years.
In the durable goods (excluding gold) category, prices rose by 0.20 percent in September, and inflation increased to –1.37 percent year-on-year.
It should be noted that prices of durable goods are likely to rise markedly in October following the expiration of temporary cuts in Special Consumption Tax (SCT) and Value Added Tax (VAT).
Annual services inflation continued to fall in September, down to 5.26 percent, the lowest level in recent history.
The drop was particularly evident in rental and transport services inflation.
Under current domestic demand conditions, annual services inflation is expected to edge further down in coming months, albeit at a more modest pace.
Committee (the Committee) expects consumer prices to accelerate temporarily in October due to seasonal increases in food and clothing prices, the hike in electricity tariffs and tax adjustments on durable goods.
However, the Committee expects that annual inflation would continue to hover around low levels.
In line with the Committee’s previous assessments, recent data releases indicate that the ongoing recovery in economic activity would be gradual and protracted.
During July-August, industrial production declined by 7.7 percent year-on-year, yet registered a modest increase over the second quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
Moreover, September’s capacity utilization data do not point to an acceleration in production growth.
Therefore, the Committee noted that capacity utilization rates are not likely to revert back to historical averages over the short run.
Second quarter national accounts data confirm that the fiscal stimulus-driven recovery in domestic demand has been confined to certain goods categories, and therefore is likely to be transitory as previously stated.
This outlook is also supported by third-quarter indicators.
The ongoing weakening of the demand for non-durable goods is especially noteworthy, causing consumer goods production to dip below its second quarter average during July-August in seasonally adjusted terms.
Similarly, imports of consumer goods were down during July-August compared to the previous quarter.
Accordingly, having increased markedly during the second quarter, consumption demand is expected to display a weaker course in the third quarter.
During July-August, the production of capital goods was up from the second quarter, whereas the imports of capital goods remained flat.
Excluding transport vehicles, the production of capital goods has also continued along a flat trend.
Thus, the Committee noted that the third quarter rise in the production of capital goods has largely been the result of tax cuts, rather than a rebound in investment demand.
Growth forecasts, particularly for the euro area, point to a more positive outlook for foreign demand over the short term as of September, and expectations about the speed of the medium-term recovery have slightly improved, compared with the July Inflation Report.
Recent export figures are consistent with this outlook.
The export quantity index rose sharply quarter-on-quarter during July-August in seasonally adjusted terms, but fell by 7.6 percent year-on-year.
The medium-term outlook for global growth suggests that it would take a long time for the GDP to reach its pre-crisis levels across advanced economies.
This outlook points to a gradual narrowing of output gaps across advanced economies, implying a sluggish recovery of exports over the near term.
Accordingly, the Committee reiterated that foreign demand is likely to continue to weigh down on aggregate demand for quite some time.
The June-August data signal that non-farm employment has ceased to contract during the third quarter.
During this period, despite having declined by 1.9 percent year-on-year, non-farm employment increased in seasonally adjusted terms for the first time since the second quarter of 2008, driving unemployment down from the second quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
The Committee agreed that, although employment indicators show some improvement, it remains to be seen whether this would turn into a robust recovery across the labor market.
The lack of a clear sign of durable global recovery and the ongoing uncertainty about aggregate demand continues to cause companies to operate at low capacity levels.
In addition to low capacity utilization and employment rates, per capita hours worked also hovers below pre-crisis levels.
The Committee expects the sluggish resource utilization and the resulting idle capacity to continue to adversely affect investment and employment decisions.
On balance, labor market conditions are likely to remain a drag on domestic demand, and thereby expected to continue supporting the decline in inflation.
The policy rate cuts implemented since November 2008, and the improvements in global risk perceptions have started to have favorable effects on credit markets.
In fact, consumer loan rates, which were reacting rather sluggishly to the policy rate cuts, have displayed a significant decline in this period.
Consequently, housing loans have displayed a stable upward trend since September.
More generally, the recovery in credit markets is expected to continue throughout the last quarter.
However, the effectiveness of the credit channel in supporting economic activity has been somewhat restrained owing to the ongoing tightness in lending standards for the small- and medium-sized enterprises.
In this respect, the Committee, after taking liquidity conditions into consideration, has taken the view hat a limited reduction in Turkish Lira reserve requirements would alleviate the tightness in credit conditions, and thus enhance the effectiveness of the expansionary monetary policy.
While the Committee members noted the improvements in credit and labor markets, they have come to the conclusion that these developments alone were not sufficient to end the easing cycle.
Yet, given the increased perceptions that the economy had passed its turning point, it was indicated that a slowdown in the pace of the rate cuts would be considered in the next meeting depending on the economic data and developments.
Although recent data releases indicate that the worst is likely to be over, concerns regarding the health of the global economy remain.
In particular, ongoing problems in credit and labor markets pose downside risks for global activity.
Should the global conditions deteriorate again, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) would consider another cycle of rate cuts.
Lingering problems across the global economy are not resolved completely and there are still uncertainties regarding the strength of the recovery.
Taking these factors into account, the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time.
Another possible scenario, according to the Committee members, is a surge in capital inflows to emerging markets owing to the relative improvement of credit risk across these countries.
Ample liquidity driven by the expansionary fiscal and monetary policies on a worldwide scale, coupled with rising risk appetites, have led to large capital inflows to emerging markets.
Current slack in the economy would imply that a fall in the cost of imported inputs could be rapidly transmitted to consumer prices, suggesting that a further acceleration in capital inflows may exacerbate downward risks on inflation.
Realization of such a scenario could lead to temporarily lower policy rates.
The CBT will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
Enhancing the framework set out in the Medium Term Program (MTP) through further structural adjustments to strengthen fiscal discipline, would support the improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk.
Should the goals set out in the MTP be implemented, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digits throughout the forecast horizon.
The course of oil and other commodity prices constitutes another important risk.
Ample liquidity driven by countercyclical policies on a global scale creates speculative movements not only regarding emerging market currencies, but also for commodity prices.
Therefore, oil and other commodity price developments warrant caution, even under a scenario of a gradual global economic recovery.
Nonetheless, weak domestic demand conditions would limit the pass-through stemming from upside cost-push shocks.
Therefore, the Committee will accommodate the short-term volatility in commodity prices, especially when the resource utilization remains at depressed levels.
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects a strong and durable rebound in global activity that would in turn create inflationary pressures, then monetary policy will react appropriately to keep inflation in line with medium- term inflation targets.
The fact that the crisis itself, and the policy responses in reaction to it, are unprecedented in recent history, creates risks regarding the inflation and monetary policy outlook.
It is extremely difficult estimate with precision the impact of the recent monetary policy measures taken at the global scale.
Although not having resorted to explicit quantitative easing eliminates some of the risks for the Turkish case, it should still be noted that the full impact of the cumulative easing of 1000 basis points since November 2008 would be seen with a lag.
In other words, although baseline scenario does not envisage any policy rate hikes for an extended period, it is important to monitor the impact of the policies closely to ensure an appropriate timely response to any development not envisaged in above assessments.
The CBT has been taking the necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy.
However, prudent monetary policy is necessary, but not sufficient to maintain the resilience of the economy against the global crisis.
Therefore, strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also critical for facilitating expectations management and thus for supporting the effectiveness of the monetary policy decisions.
Consumer prices surged by 2.41 percent in October, while inflation declined to 5.08 percent year-on-year.
October price developments coincided with the outlook presented in the Summary of the September .
While annual inflation decreased, monthly inflation picked up dramatically due to seasonal price hikes in food and clothing, renewed electricity tariffs and tax adjustments on durable goods.
The annual rate of increase in food prices fell to 5.82 percent in October.
Lower exports of fruits and vegetables brought annual food inflation down, while soaring meat prices put upward pressure on food and catering prices.
Energy prices rose by 2.50 percent in October, of which the hikes in residential electricity tariffs accounted for 2.30 percentage points.
Consequently, the rise in energy prices added about 0.35 percentage points to CPI inflation.
Despite having edged up since May, energy prices still hover around the year-ago level.
Prices of durable goods were up 4.24 percent in October following the expiration of the temporary tax cuts.
Adjusted for changes in taxes, the rate of increase in durable goods appears to remain subdued and stable.
Annual services inflation, which was on a continuous declining path in the last one year, displayed a modest increase in October.
However, the assessment of the subcategories indicates that this development would not adversely affect the broader outlook.
Although, seasonally adjusted monthly increase in services inflation is higher than the levels registered during the first quarter (when the effects of the economic slump on inflation was most significant), it remains well below the pre-crisis average.
Overall, adjusted for tax changes, core inflation measures suggest that underlying inflation continues to run at low levels.
Committee’s (the Committee) previous assessments, recent data releases indicate that the ongoing recovery in economic activity would be gradual and protracted.
During the third quarter, average industrial production was slightly up from the second quarter, in seasonally adjusted terms.
While October’s capacity utilization data indicate that production continues to grow modestly, considerable slack remains.
The Committee emphasized that the recovery in production is slow, and noted that the support of the fiscal measures to the production has been limited at this stage, and that underlying economic activity is still weak.
Against this backdrop, the Committee reiterated that the current pace of economic recovery would not put upward pressure on inflation, as it implies low resource utilization for quite some time.
Consumption demand has displayed a weaker course, after having increased markedly during the second quarter.
Production in non-durable goods, which was not targeted by the fiscal stimulus, continued to contract in September, also partly owing to the significant income effect.
Accordingly, consumer goods production fell quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms during the third quarter, while imports of consumer goods rose at a more moderate pace than in the second quarter.
Production and imports data suggest that consumption demand was essentially flat in the third quarter.
Moreover, following the expiration of the tax incentives in October, indicators point to further weakening in domestic demand.
The lack of domestic demand continued to increase as a factor restraining capacity utilization during October in seasonally adjusted terms, and at the same time, consumption indices declined significantly month-on-month.
Excluding transport vehicles, the production of capital goods flattened out during the third quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
A similar pattern was also observed in capital goods imports.
Taken together, these indicators suggest that, despite a slight quarterly rebound in the third quarter, private machinery and equipment investments remain at low levels.
The Committee restated that the current demand uncertainty and idle capacity might continue to have a dampening effect on investment.
The export quantity index dropped by 11.8 percent year-on-year during the third quarter, but was up quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
October and November data indicate that exports continue to recover modestly.
Another factor restraining capacity utilization has been the weak demand in foreign markets.
Although this adverse impact has been easing since June, owing in particular to the improved outlook for euro area growth and new export market opportunities, it remains to be seen whether the recent improvement in the foreign demand outlook is sustainable.
Committee members noted that the global economic recovery driven by fiscal and monetary expansion packages since the second quarter of 2009 might lose momentum with the gradual withdrawal of these measures.
Thus, the Committee indicated that it would take quite a long time for foreign demand to return to pre-crisis levels.
Employment conditions are likely to take a long time to fully recover.
In fact, having declined during the past two months in seasonally adjusted terms, non- farm unemployment rose again month-on-month during July-September period.
Accordingly, non-farm unemployment climbed to 17 percent in the third quarter, which is 4.1 percentage points higher compared to the previous year.
Applications for unemployment benefits remained at high levels in October, indicating that unemployment would remain elevated during the final quarter.
In view of the current economic outlook, the Committee maintained the view that it would take a long time for the employment conditions to fully recover.
The Committee, in light of the assessments summarized above, reiterated that resource utilization, and thus inflation, would continue to hover around low levels.
While headline annual inflation could display some upward movements through mid-2010 due to strong base effects, it was reemphasized that this possibility had already been reflected in the monetary stance outlined in the October Inflation Report.
Accordingly, the Committee indicated that the monetary policy stance outlined in the Inflation Report has not changed.
The policy rate cuts implemented since November 2008, and the improvements in global risk perceptions have started to exert favorable effects on credit markets.
Although the recent Banks’ Loan Tendency Survey suggests that banks are still cautious in extending loans, there are signs of easing lending standards, especially in consumer loans.
The Survey also reveals the expectation of a continued recovery in credit demand.
However, the effectiveness of the credit channel in supporting economic activity has been somewhat restrained owing to the ongoing tightness in lending standards for small- and medium-sized enterprises and for longer-term loans.
Although recent data releases indicate that the worst is likely to be over, concerns regarding the strength of the global recovery remain.
Should global conditions deteriorate again, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, another cycle of rate cuts would be considered.
Given the lingering problems across the global economy and the ongoing uncertainty regarding the strength of the recovery, the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary for the monetary policy to maintain an easing bias for a long period of time.
Moreover, the Committee emphasized that policy rates had been cut by 1025 basis points since November 2008, and thus, rather than focusing on the level of the policy rate in the current circumstances, it would be more important to keep rates at low levels for an extended period.
Therefore, it was indicated that future rate decisions would be conditional on economic data and developments.
According to the Committee members, another possible scenario involves a surge in capital inflows to emerging markets owing to the relative improvement of credit risk across these countries.
The Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
The course of oil and other commodity prices constitutes another important risk factor.
Ample liquidity driven by countercyclical policies on a global scale has encouraged speculative investments not only into emerging market currencies, but also into commodities.
Therefore, oil and other commodity price developments warrant careful surveillance, even under a scenario of a gradual global economic recovery.
Therefore, the Committee will not react to short-term commodity price volatility, especially when resource utilization remains at depressed levels.
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects a strong and durable rebound in global activity that would in turn create inflationary pressures, then monetary policy will react appropriately to keep inflation in line with the medium-term inflation targets.
Consumer prices increased by 1.27 percent in November, driving annual inflation up by 0.45 percentage points to 5.53 percent year-on-year, largely due to rising unprocessed food prices.
When unprocessed food, energy and gold are excluded, November outturn represents one of the lowest monthly inflation rates recorded in recent years.
In addition, the behavior of subcategories does not point to a deterioration in the general pricing behavior.
Overall, the November rise in annual inflation is mainly attributable to transitory factors and base effects, and thus underlying trend inflation remains subdued.
Food prices have been the major factor underlying the recent increase in inflation.
In particular, unprocessed food prices have remained volatile over the year.
After having registered the lowest third quarter rate of change in five years, unprocessed food prices ran above seasonal averages during the last two months owing to higher fruit/vegetable and meat prices, which is expected to continue into December.
In contrast, the outlook regarding processed food prices remains favorable.
Having picked up due to hikes in electricity tariffs during October, energy prices continued to rise in November in line with international oil prices.
The annual rate of increase in energy prices is expected to accelerate in coming months owing to base effects.
The drop in commodity prices during the final quarter of 2008 had driven energy prices down sharply starting from December 2008.
Therefore, the resulting impact of these base effects on inflation is expected to be visible starting from December 2009.
Owing to the expiration of the temporary tax cuts, the annual rate of increase in the prices of goods excluding energy and food continued to increase in November.
Underpinning this development was the 7.61 percent rise in gold prices owing to soaring international prices as well as the increase in clothing and footwear inflation that was driven by the low base effects from a year ago.
Annual services inflation continued along a downtrend during November.
Annual rental inflation declined further, while prices for transport and other services dropped modestly.
Higher meat prices had a more moderate impact on restaurants and hotels than in the previous two months.
Thus, annual inflation in the overall services index decreased to historically low levels.
Committee (the Committee) stated that the upcoming period would be marked by strong base effects, particularly leading to a sizeable increase in annual inflation in December.
Yet, the Committee expects core inflation to remain at low levels.
Third quarter national accounts releases were consistent with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) continued to grow quarter-on-quarter, albeit slowly.
In particular, the data confirmed that after a robust second quarter, private consumption moderated as tax cuts were phased out.
Meanwhile, private investments have recovered slightly quarter-on-quarter for the first time in a long while.
Taken together, total final domestic demand has remained flat.
Recent readings suggest that the economy is on track for moderate recovery.
Industrial production increased by 6.5 percent year-on-year during October 2009, which was the first year-on-year positive growth rate for a long period of time.
However, the Committee attributed the production growth largely to working-day effects and noted that industrial production continued to contract year-on-year after adjusting for calendar-related effects.
The Committee expects calendar effects to remain prevalent during November and December, and emphasizes that year-on-year comparisons should be based on calendar- adjusted data.
The Committee indicated that industrial production grew markedly month-on- month during October, even in seasonally adjusted terms.
Yet, production is likely to fluctuate beyond seasonal patterns during the month of Ramadan and the ensuing religious holiday period, and therefore assessments regarding production should not rely on a single month’s realization.
Accordingly, comparing the September-October period with the July-August period suggest that industrial production is on a moderate recovery path in seasonally adjusted terms.
Thus, it should be noted that it would be inappropriate to conclude a strong and durable recovery in production, based solely on the October data.
Leading indicators suggest that the pace of growth continued to slow in the fourth quarter.
With the expiration of all tax incentives, the underlying trend for consumption demand has moderated.
The unfavorable outlook continues for spending categories more sensitive to current income.
The Committee members noted that, given the precarious labor market conditions, the demand for categories sensitive to current income might continue to be weak.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the production of consumer goods remained virtually unchanged in October from a quarter ago, while imports, especially of passenger cars, contracted.
Consumer confidence and consumption indices confirm this weak outlook.
Therefore, consumption demand is expected to remain mostly flat during the final quarter.
Among the factors restraining capacity utilization across manufacturing industries, the share of insufficient domestic demand continued to increase, while the role attributed to weak foreign markets remains high.
In addition, aggregate demand uncertainty continues to suppress investment demand.
Considering both production and import data, investment demand is expected to recover further during the fourth quarter, yet remain at low levels.
The Committee restated that the idle capacity resulting from low resource utilization is likely to have a dampening effect on investment demand for quite some time.
In this context, the absence of a strong and sustained turnaround in industrial production continues to restrain services sectors with strong industrial linkages, such as trade and transport/communication as well as the outlook for economic activity and employment prospects more generally.
In fact, closer inspection of the industrial composition reveals that trade-related services sectors seem to have been particularly more affected by foreign demand conditions.
Therefore, without a marked improvement in foreign demand and/or significant diversification in export markets, economic recovery is not likely.
Hence, the Committee reiterated its expectation that aggregate demand would recover gradually.
Uncertainties regarding aggregate demand linger, and employment conditions are expected to take a long time to fully recover.
In fact, unemployment rose by 2.7 percentage points to 13.4 percent year-on-year during September 2009, while non-farm unemployment increased by 3.5 percentage points year- on-year.
The labor force participation rate continues to have an adverse impact on the unemployment rate.
After hitting a record high in May 2009, non-farm and overall unemployment rates have recently recovered in seasonally adjusted terms, albeit modestly.
The end of the decline in industrial employment was viewed by the Committee as an important development.
However, given the slow pace of recovery in employment, the unemployment rate is likely to remain elevated for a long time.
The collapse of global demand and commodity prices after the intensification of the global crisis during the last quarter of 2008 had been followed by a sharp fall in inflation.
Accordingly, annual inflation―the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index―is likely to display upward movements owing to base effects, although monthly rate of changes in prices are expected to hover at moderate levels.
The Committee therefore stated that strong base effects could lead to a significant increase in annual inflation in the forthcoming period, especially in December; yet core inflation would remain at low levels.
Annual inflation could display upward movements through mid-2010 by the same token, yet this possibility had already been reflected in the monetary stance outlined in the October Inflation Report.
The Committee indicated that the economic activity is on a moderate but stable upward trend.
However, resource utilization, hence inflation, is expected to stay around low levels in the medium term, given the existing low levels of capital and labor utilization.
Therefore, core inflation indicators would display a modest pace, and hence annual inflation is expected to revert back to a declining trend in the last quarter of 2010, ending the year below the target.
Committee members have also underscored the important role of the sound domestic banking system in supporting the recovery in credit markets.
However, the ongoing tightness in lending standards regarding credit to small- and medium-sized enterprises as well as longer-term loans is still a factor restraining economic activity.
Accordingly, taking into account that lingering problems across the global economy have yet to be resolved completely and there are still uncertainties regarding the strength of the recovery, the Committee, in line with the policy stance presented in the Inflation Report, emphasized that it would be necessary to keep policy rates at low levels for a long period of time.
Committee members stated that although materialization of this scenario has become less likely, it should not be completely disregarded.
Given the current slack across the economy, a fall in the cost of imported inputs could be rapidly transmitted to consumer prices, suggesting that a further acceleration in capital inflows may exacerbate downward risks on inflation.
Should the goals set out in the MTP be implemented, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digits throughout the medium term.
Consumer prices increased by 0.53 percent in December, driving annual inflation up by 1 percentage point to 6.53 percent, owing to rising unprocessed food prices and base effects stemming from the low levels of last year’s energy and clothing prices.
In other words, the December rise in annual inflation is largely attributable to transitory factors and therefore does not point to a deterioration in underlying trend inflation.
Unprocessed food prices continued to soar in December, recording the largest fourth-quarter increase in six years.
In contrast, the developments regarding processed food prices have remained favorable.
Energy prices accounted for most of the base effect that drove annual inflation higher in December.
In fact, although energy prices rose by a mere 0.65 percent month-on-month, annual energy inflation was up by 3.4 percentage points.
Increases in prices of certain energy items in January, due to the Special Consumption Tax and electricity price hikes, will add around 0.4 percentage points to headline inflation.
Given these adjustments and base effects, the annual rate of increase in energy prices is expected to increase significantly in January.
The annual rate of increase in the prices of goods excluding energy and food slowed down in December to 6.15 percent, mainly due to falling prices of durable goods and pharmaceuticals.
On the other hand, annual clothing and footwear inflation increased owing to base effects.
The new tax measures implemented on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products in January to restore government balances are expected to add about 1.1 percentage points to CPI inflation.
Despite having increased slightly during December, annual services inflation remains subdued.
Higher meat prices continued to weigh on catering prices, while annual rental inflation declined further, and prices for transport and other services increased modestly.
Committee (the Committee) indicated that tax adjustments and base effects would cause inflation to rise significantly over the next two months and to remain above the target for some time.
Yet, the underlying trend implied by core inflation indicators is expected to remain at levels consistent with medium-term targets.
In this respect, it was emphasized that inflation would display a declining trend once the temporary factors taper off.
Recent data releases suggest that a moderate recovery in economic activity is ongoing.
Industrial production grew slightly month-on-month during November 2009 in seasonally adjusted terms; yet, the average production for the October-November period was higher from a quarter earlier.
Being on a slight uptrend since the second quarter, capacity utilization continued to grow modestly in the fourth quarter.
Industrial production contracted by 2.2 percent year-on-year in November, but grew by 5.8 percent year-on-year in calendar adjusted terms.
Accordingly, the Committee once again highlighted the working-day effect due to religious holidays during the final quarter and the base effect resulting from the marked decline in production a year ago.
Committee members noted that these effects would cause industrial production to increase substantially year-on-year in December, and stated that assessments regarding the economic recovery should be based on data adjusted for seasonal and calendar-related effects.
Leading indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to recover modestly.
Consumption demand appears to have lost momentum following the expiration of tax cuts intended to spur economic activity.
Furthermore, the rising trend in the production of consumer goods slowed during October- November.
Imports of consumer goods have almost flattened.
Despite a further recovery during the fourth quarter, production and imports data regarding investment demand indicate that investment demand still hovers around lows levels.
Foreign demand continues to grow moderately.
October-November average of the export quantity index was up by 0.7 percent year-on-year, increasing in quarterly seasonally adjusted terms.
The course of foreign demand in the upcoming period would be closely linked to the pace of the global recovery.
According to survey data, export orders do not point to a strong rebound in exports in the short term, while insufficient foreign demand continues to rank high among factors that prevent manufacturing industries from operating at full capacity.
Projections for the euro area, our largest trading partner, suggest that it would take a long time for foreign demand to return to previous levels.
The outlook for employment and wages is of critical importance for domestic demand over the medium term.
Real wages had dropped sharply following the employment slump during late 2008, and have restrained consumption demand.
In line with the reflection of the moderate economic recovery on the labor market, real wages started to rise again by the third quarter of 2009.
Nevertheless, the current level of foreign demand continues to contain economic activity and employment in general by suppressing industrial activity.
Hence, real wages in the short term are unlikely to bounce back to the levels associated with past episodes of strong economic growth, and therefore wage developments would continue to restrain domestic demand for quite some time.
In sum, while the downtrend in consumer confidence indices and the ongoing risks regarding the global economy continue to pose uncertainties regarding aggregate demand, the economy continues on a moderate recovery track.
Given the current level of the economic activity and the pace of economic recovery, the Committee expects that capacity utilization and employment conditions would take a long time to fully recover.
The Committee indicated that tax adjustments and base effects would cause inflation to rise significantly over the next two months and also remain above target for some time.
In this respect, January Inflation Report forecasts were revised significantly upwards for 2010, compared to the previous Report.
However, noting that the underlying trend implied by core inflation indicators would remain at levels consistent with medium-term targets, the Committee emphasized that, given the low levels of resource utilization, the precarious state of labor markets, and global economic conditions, general pricing behavior would not be affected adversely by the temporary rise in inflation, and therefore, inflation would display a declining trend once the transitory effects taper off.
Therefore, there has been no major change in the January Inflation Report regarding the inflation forecasts for 2011 and thereafter.
The Committee noted that credit markets have continued to improve in response to the monetary easing and the improvements in global risk perceptions.
The tightness in credit conditions have been moderating since the publication of the July Inflation Report.
Easing financial conditions and declining loan rates have been strengthening the expansionary impact of monetary policy.
The October Inflation Report had stated that the credit channel would begin to support domestic economic activity during the fourth quarter of the year.
In fact, credit demand has started to recover in this period, especially with commercial loans picking up significantly.
However, lingering problems across the global economy are not resolved completely and there are still uncertainties regarding the strength of the recovery.
Accordingly, the Committee has emphasized that it would be necessary to keep policy rates at low levels for a long period of time.
The outlook for domestic economy has been largely shaped by global developments since the intensification of the global crisis during the last quarter of 2008.
Given the important role of the trade and global financial channels in the contraction of domestic economic activity during 2009, it is expected that the global developments would continue to be the main driving factor for the outlook for domestic activity and inflation in the forthcoming period.
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that both the risks on global and domestic economic activity, as well as their impact on inflation should be considered jointly.
Rising budget deficits and ongoing problems in credit and real estate markets continue to pose downside risks for global activity, especially for developed economies.
Although the probability of another disruption in global economic activity has been decreasing, it is still an important source of downside risk on domestic economic activity and inflation.
Should the global conditions deteriorate again, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, the Committee would consider further monetary easing.
Despite the prevailing downside risks on global and domestic economic activity, upside risks have also been emerging since the second half of 2009, given the pace of global recovery over this period.
Moreover, it should be noted that the impact of the unprecedented expansionary policy measures since the last quarter of 2008 would be observed with a lag.
Similarly, the 1025 basis points cumulative easing in policy rates of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) between November 2008 and November 2009 would also be fully transmitted with a lag.
In this respect, the Committee indicated that, should the recovery in domestic economic activity turn out to be faster than expected, the limited monetary policy tightening implied by the baseline scenario in the Inflation Report could be implemented earlier than envisaged.
According to the Committee members, the fact that inflation will rise in the forthcoming period due to base effects and recent tax hikes, poses an important risk factor through its potential impact on inflation expectations.
Several adverse factors (such as food, oil, base effects and administered price hikes) have been leading to upward movements in inflation since the last quarter of 2009.
Although these factors are temporary, they will likely cause headline inflation to stay at elevated levels for sometime.
It is crucial that the economic agents fully understand the temporary nature of these developments while forming their medium- and longer-term expectations.
Given the low levels of resource utilization, the adverse impact of the depressed labor market conditions on consumption expenditure, and the gradual removal of fiscal stimulus, these temporary factors as well as other cost push pressures would not lead to a significant deterioration in general pricing behavior.
Currently, services and core inflation are consistent with medium-term inflation targets, and resource utilization is at low levels.
Therefore, it is foreseen that the policy rates would be maintained at low levels for a long period.
However, it should be underscored that the Committee will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy sooner than envisioned under the baseline scenario of the Inflation Report, should any unforeseen developments lead to a deterioration in general price setting behavior.
Increasing budget deficits on a worldwide scale, especially in developed economies, continue to pose risks on inflation expectations and thus on longer-term global interest rates.
Countries with relatively sounder banking systems and prudent fiscal policies would be more resilient against these risks.
In this respect, the Committee will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
Should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented through institutional and structural measures, rather than tax and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels throughout the forecast horizon.
The Committee Members continue to view the course of oil and other commodity prices as an important risk factor.
Ample liquidity driven by countercyclical policies on a global scale facilitates speculative movements for commodity prices.
Fast growth trends in countries like China and India, and the rising share of these economies in global commodity demand, exacerbate these speculative motives.
Therefore, oil and other commodity price developments may continue to rise, even under a scenario of a gradual global economic recovery.
At this point it is worth noting that weak domestic demand conditions would limit the pass-through stemming from upside cost-push shocks.
Therefore, the Committee will not react to the first round effects of short-term volatility in commodity prices, especially when the resource utilization remains at depressed levels.
However, if an uptrend in commodity prices reflects a strong and durable rebound in global economic activity that would in turn have adverse effects on inflation expectations, then the monetary policy will be tightened appropriately to keep inflation in line with medium-term inflation targets.
Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, without endangering its main objective of price stability, has focused on containing the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic economy, and this task has been achieved to a large extent.
Monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability in the period ahead.
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda would support the improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program and the European Union accession process remains to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices increased by 1.85 percent in January, driving annual inflation up by 1.66 percentage points to 8.19 percent.
As emphasized in the January .
Committee (Committee) Meeting Summary, the recent rise in annual inflation was primarily due to the administered price and tax adjustments, which added around 1.7 percentage points to CPI inflation in January, and will add another 0.2 percentage points in February.
Therefore, the total impact is estimated to reach around 1.9 percentage points.
After the tax adjustments are accounted for, underlying inflation continues to hover at low levels.
In January, unprocessed food prices picked up at a slower pace than the seasonal norm.
Yet, the red meat prices continued to rise, having an indirect impact on processed food and catering prices and leading to higher annual inflation in these subcategories.
Moreover, the rise in vegetable prices driven by heavy rainfall and floods may produce a significant but temporary upsurge in the annual unprocessed food inflation in February.
Energy prices were up 3.94 percent in January owing to adjustments in Special Consumption Tax and administered prices.
Thus, the annual rate of increase in energy prices rose to 8.13 percent.
Annual energy inflation is likely to increase further in coming months due to base effects.
The annual rate of increase in prices of goods excluding energy and food accelerated in February with the 22 percent increase in tobacco prices; but excluding tobacco, it slowed down from a month earlier.
The annual rate of increase in services prices rose moderately, largely owing to changes in costs rather than demand-side factors.
In fact, seasonally adjusted data show that the monthly rate of increase in the prices of services, excluding transport and catering, remained modest.
The Committee indicated that, due to tax adjustments, unprocessed food price increases and base effects, annual inflation would continue to rise markedly in February and hover above the target for some time.
Aggregate demand slumped with the deepening of the global recession during the first quarter of 2009 causing the rate of change in core price indices to decline to historic lows.
Therefore, core inflation indicators would also increase slightly until mid- year owing to base effects, yet remain below the target throughout the year.
Industrial production grew by a robust 25.2 percent year-on-year in December, which seemingly points to a vigorous recovery.
However, as noted earlier by the Committee, the rapid growth of production was largely driven by calendar effects and the low December 2009 base.
Monthly and quarterly growth rates of seasonally adjusted industrial production figures suggest that the economic activity continues to expand, yet the pace of recovery is moderate.
Moreover, the capacity utilization for January 2010 does not point to an acceleration in manufacturing activity.
Domestic demand displays a gradual growth trend.
Production and imports data indicate that private consumption demand increased quarter-on-quarter during the fourth quarter but remained at low levels.
Given the partial recovery in the labor market and expansionary monetary policy, private consumption demand may continue to rise gradually.
In fact, the recent increase in total wage compensation and credit utilization supports private consumption demand.
Production and imports data for capital goods suggest that the recovery in private investment demand continued into the final quarter.
Investments are likely to grow further in the upcoming period, but aggregate demand uncertainty may continue to restrain resource utilization and new investments.
Therefore, investment demand is likely to remain below pre-crisis levels for a long period.
Uncertainty regarding foreign demand remains.
The Committee noted that the pace of recovery in real exports (excluding gold) is far below the pre-crisis level.
Leading indicators suggest that the slow pace continued into January.
While access to new markets may continue to support exports, the Committee emphasized that the growth outlook for existing export markets, particularly the euro area, remains relatively weaker, and thus the recovery in exports are likely to remain gradual.
Taken together, this view regarding aggregate demand seems to imply that it will take a while before capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Although there has been a mild improvement in employment conditions, unemployment rates remain at high levels.
With the modest rebound in production, employment grew by 3.5 percent year-on-year in November 2009, while non-farm employment increased by 2 percent.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that the recovery in non-farm employment spread across all industries.
Employment continues to grow steadily in construction and services, but still lags behind pre-crisis levels in the industrial sector.
Committee members noted that industrial employment is unlikely to improve significantly unless there is a durable recovery in foreign demand.
In sum, fourth-quarter data suggests that the economic recovery is ongoing.
The Committee reiterated that the medium-term trend of aggregate demand would largely depend on the global growth outlook.
Based on the assumption that the economy would recover gradually, resource utilization is expected to remain at low levels for some time and continue to support disinflation.
In this respect, the Committee emphasized that inflation would display a declining trend once the temporary factors, such as unprocessed food price volatility and tax hikes, taper off.
The Committee noted that credit markets have continued to improve due to lagged effects of the monetary easing.
Accordingly, the Committee has reemphasized that it would be necessary to keep policy rates at low levels for a long period of time.
The Committee noted that as predicted in the January Inflation Report, inflation would display sharp increases during the first two months of the year because of tax adjustments and base effects.
Moreover, it was emphasized that there would be an additional temporary impact in February coming from a further jump in vegetable prices caused by heavy rainfall and floods.
Therefore, inflation is expected to exceed the levels envisaged for February; however, as vegetable prices normalize during March, inflation would revert back to the levels consistent with the January Inflation Report forecast, At the same time, noting that the underlying trend implied by core inflation indicators would remain at levels consistent with medium-term targets, the Committee emphasized that, given the low levels of resource utilization, the precarious state of labor markets, and global economic conditions, general pricing behavior would not be adversely affected by the temporary rise in inflation, and therefore, inflation would display a declining trend once the transitory effects taper off.
However, it should be underscored that the Committee will not hesitate to tighten the stance of monetary policy sooner than envisioned under the baseline scenario of the Inflation Report, should any unforeseen developments lead to a deterioration in general price setting behavior.
Both upside and downside risks to global economic activity remain.
Although the probability of a disruption in the recovery of global economic activity has been decreasing, it is still an important source of downside risk on domestic economic activity and inflation.
On the other hand, upside risks have also been emerging since the second half of 2009, given the pace of global recovery over this period.
The Committee will closely monitor global developments and their impact on domestic inflation, and will take the necessary measures to keep inflation in line with the medium term targets.
In fact, recently, long term interest rates in the US economy have been displaying significant increases.
Should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented through institutional and structural improvements, rather than tax and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels throughout the forecast horizon.
Fast growth trends in countries like China and India, and the rising share of these economies in global commodity demand, create further pressures on oil and other commodity prices.
Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, without prejudice to its primary objective of price stability, has focused on containing the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic economy, and this task has been achieved to a large extent.
Consumer prices increased by 1.45 percent in February, pushing annual inflation up by 1.94 percentage points to 10.13 percent.
As noted in February’s .
Committee (the Committee) Meeting Summary, the recent rise in annual inflation was driven by temporary factors such as soaring unprocessed food prices, lagged impacts of tax adjustments, and base effects.
In fact, core inflation indicators have continued to hover at low levels, notwithstanding the rise in annual inflation.
The steep increase in vegetable prices due to adverse weather conditions and the ongoing surge in meat prices pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by about 10 percentage points in February.
Nonetheless, there may be a correction in vegetable prices during March.
Besides the developments in unprocessed food items, price hikes in energy and tobacco also put upward pressure on inflation.
Energy prices continued to increase in February on the back of higher bottled gas and auto LPG prices.
Annual energy inflation is expected to rise further in coming months owing to base effects.
Meanwhile, tobacco inflation continued to accelerate due to the spillover of January’s tax changes.
By contrast, weak aggregate demand has dampened the pass-through of price hikes in food, energy and tobacco into overall pricing trends.
The end- February annual inflation across core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) was a modest 2.17 percent.
The low level of inflation in core goods was particularly driven by durable good items.
The impact of higher food and energy prices on catering and transport services became more significant, while prices of other services continued to rise at a slower pace.
The Committee noted that, although seasonally adjusted services inflation has been rising modestly for a while, underlying services inflation is consistent with the medium-term targets.
Nevertheless, Committee members emphasized that overall pricing behavior needs to be closely monitored.
Industrial production grew by 12.1 percent year-on-year in January, which is equivalent to 16.1 percent in calendar adjusted terms.
The seasonally adjusted industrial production index was up 0.3 percent month-on-month, pointing to ongoing yet slower growth.
Leading indicators suggest that industrial production has continued to recover in February and March.
Domestic demand is following a gradual growth trend.
The recent growth in labor compensation and favorable developments across credit markets are supporting the recovery in private consumption.
Production and imports data indicate that private consumption demand increased moderately during the final quarter of 2009.
Moreover, releases on consumer goods production in January signal an ongoing recovery in private consumption demand.
In addition, new order indices in the PMI show that the recovery in private consumption demand continued into the first quarter, albeit at a slower pace, which is also supported by the flattening of consumer confidence indices.
Production and imports data for capital goods suggest that the recovery in private investment demand has yet to gain momentum.
Indicators of resource utilization, such as capacity utilization in the manufacturing industry and hours worked per capita, remain weak, while manufacturing firms continue to view their production capacity as “more than sufficient”, considering their current order books and demand expectations.
Investment demand is expected to continue to grow moderately in the upcoming period.
Yet, insufficient and uncertain aggregate demand is likely to restrain new investments in the manufacturing industry, given the weak global growth outlook.
Accordingly, the Committee expects investment demand to remain below pre-crisis levels for a while.
The Committee emphasized that the outlook for existing export markets, particularly the euro area, remains weak, and reiterated that the recovery in exports would be gradual, which is demonstrated by the recent trends in leading indicators for exports.
Thus, it will take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Although employment conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates remain at high levels.
Seasonally adjusted data for December indicate that non-farm employment continues to recover.
Weak foreign demand continued to restrain industrial employment, while the recovery in construction and services sectors helped non-farm employment return to pre-crisis levels.
Overall, recent data releases suggest that the economic recovery is ongoing.
The lagged effects of monetary policy actions on domestic demand have become more pronounced, while the weak outlook for global growth continues to dampen resource utilization in tradable sectors.
Overall, the Committee continues to expect the economic recovery to be gradual.
Monetary policy decisions are based on the medium-term outlook for inflation, rather than temporary price developments.
However, the Committee members indicated that, for the purpose of managing expectations, it might be useful to inform economic agents about the likely path of inflation in the short term, given that inflation currently hovers significantly above the target.
With the partial correction in unprocessed food prices, the Committee members expect inflation to drop to single digit levels in March.
However, the Committee indicated that inflation would display fluctuations in 2010 owing to the base effects driven by the temporary tax cuts and volatile unprocessed food prices during 2009.
Temporary tax cuts implemented in March 2009, which were withdrawn partly in June and fully in October, would lead to rising inflation rates during March and April, and a decrease in inflation rates during June and October of 2010.
Moreover, unprocessed food inflation registered a historically high print in the last quarter of 2009, following a historical low during the third quarter.
These strong base effects would likely lead to fluctuations in headline inflation throughout 2010, therefore making it difficult to assess underlying trend inflation.
In this respect, the Committee underscored that economic agents should closely monitor the Central Bank’s reports and statements regarding inflation developments.
The Committee stated that the impact of the sharp increases in unprocessed food prices during the last quarter of 2009 would ease in the final quarter of 2010.
Likewise, the 1.9 percentage point impact of the recent tax hikes on inflation would dissipate during the January-February period of 2011.
Accordingly, inflation would continue to hover significantly above target for some time, however, it would then revert to a downward trend as the temporary factors taper off starting in the last quarter of the year, and decline to levels consistent with inflation targets by early 2011.
Core inflation indicators would increase in the short term as well, especially during March and April, owing to the base effects driven by the temporary tax cuts of the previous year.
However, in line with the modest recovery in aggregate demand conditions, core inflation indicators would continue to remain below the target.
Increasing headline inflation is having an adverse impact on inflation expectations.
The current state of aggregate demand conditions is expected to dampen the pass-through of the rise in unprocessed food and administered prices on overall prices.
Still, the Committee members underscored the importance of closely monitoring price setting behavior, given that Turkey has had to cope with high levels of inflation in the past.
Credit markets have continued to improve in response to the monetary easing.
Committee members noted that easing financial conditions have been strengthening the expansionary impact of monetary policy.
Commercial loans have recovered significantly in the first two months of the year, while the recovery in consumer loans has been relatively more moderate.
The Committee indicated that lagged impacts of the monetary easing would continue to support the credit markets, yet high levels of unemployment rates and relatively tight external financing conditions would restrain credit growth.
The global economy continues to recover.
However, the high levels of budget deficits on a global scale and ongoing problems in credit and real estate markets continue to pose downside risks on global activity, particularly in developed economies.
Overall, despite recent improvements, there are still lingering problems across the global economy.
Accordingly, the Committee has reiterated that it would be necessary to keep policy rates at low levels for a long period of time.
However, the CBT will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy sooner than envisaged in the baseline scenario of the Inflation Report, should the recent increase in inflation expectations lead to a deterioration in price setting behavior.
Increasing budget deficits on a worldwide scale, particularly across developed economies, continue to pose risks on inflation expectations and thus on longer-term global interest rates.
In fact, recently, long-term interest rates across developed economies have been displaying significant increases.
Countries with relatively sounder banking systems and prudent fiscal policies would be more resilient against such risks.
Should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented through institutional and structural improvements, rather than tax and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels over the medium term.
Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, without prejudice to its primary objective of price stability, has focused on containing the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic economy—which has been achieved to a large extent.
Consumer prices increased by 0.58 percent in March.
Annual inflation was down 0.57 percentage points yielding a rate of 9.56 percent.
The decline in annual inflation was largely driven by the correction in vegetable prices, as envisaged in the Summary of the .
Committee (the Committee) Meeting held in March.
Developments in energy and food prices lead to fluctuations in inflation.
After a sharp increase in February driven by adverse weather conditions, vegetable prices displayed a partial correction in March.
On the other hand, meat prices continued to rise, albeit at a slower pace, and remained the main driver of higher food prices.
In fact, the cumulative price hike for unprocessed and processed meat products amounted to 9.85 and 8.86 percent, respectively, during the first quarter.
Meanwhile, annual energy inflation continued to rise in March to 10.26 percent on the back of the low base effect from 2009 as well as higher fuel and water prices.
Therefore, food and energy items account for 4.62 percentage points of annual inflation as of the end of the first quarter.
Food and energy prices are expected to remain volatile over the upcoming period.
Core inflation indicators rose markedly in March.
The year-on-year increase in core goods prices (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) was largely attributable to the base effect resulting from the tax cuts on durable goods in 2009, and partly to developments in clothing prices.
On the other hand, inflation in other goods continued on a downtrend.
Similarly, the annual rate of change in prices of services increased significantly in March.
While higher energy prices put further pressure on transport services, rising meat prices continued to weigh on catering services.
Moreover, landline call rates soared, accounting for about one-fourth of the increase in annual core inflation measured by the H index.
The Committee expects that core inflation indicators would increase in April as well, owing to the temporary tax cuts of the previous year, but would continue to remain at levels below the target.
Recent data releases suggest that the recovery in economic activity is ongoing.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 6.0 percent year-on- year during the fourth quarter of 2009, and by 2.3 percent quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, indicating that economic activity has continued to recover, albeit more modestly.
On the spending side, public consumption grew rapidly to bolster quarterly GDP growth, whereas private demand remained more moderate.
The run-up in public spending on goods and services was due to advance payment of the health care expenditures for 2010 amid the improved budget revenue performance.
In this respect, the Committee emphasized that the marked increase in public spending is largely transitory.
First-quarter data suggest that economic activity continued to recover in 2010.
In February, the seasonally adjusted industrial production index increased by 1.6 percent month-on-month.
Industrial production is expected to grow at a slightly faster pace during March.
The Committee noted that industrial production grew by 17.2 percent year-on-year during January-February in calendar adjusted terms, and emphasized that annual growth would reach double digits in the first quarter owing to the low base effect from a year earlier.
Nevertheless, the Committee reiterated that growth rates in seasonally adjusted terms are more informative for assessing the underlying trend in economic activity.
The effects of the policy rate cuts and increased public spending are having a more noticeable effect on domestic demand, with sectors more sensitive to domestic demand experiencing relatively stronger growth performances.
The recent pick-up in industrial production indicates that sectors with strong linkages to non-durable goods manufacturing and construction have been on the rebound.
Commercial loan and employment data verify that the recovery is more pronounced in the services sector, which is more sensitive to domestic demand, compared to the industrial sector.
Both the increase in labor compensation driven by employment growth and the favorable developments across credit markets are supporting the recovery in private consumption.
Production and imports data indicate that private consumption demand continued to rise moderately during the first quarter.
The PMI new order index suggests that the recovery continued into the first quarter, albeit at a slower pace, which is also confirmed by the consumer confidence indices.
The global growth outlook continues to dampen economic activity, particularly in sectors that are relatively more sensitive to foreign demand, such as export-oriented industrial sectors and related services sectors.
Following the recent crisis, manufacturing firms that mostly serve external markets are operating at lower capacity than local market-oriented firms.
Accordingly, indicators of resource utilization, such as capacity utilization in the manufacturing industry and hours worked per capita, remain weak.
Yet, given the weak global growth outlook, insufficient and uncertain aggregate demand is likely to restrain new investments in the manufacturing industry.
Therefore, the Committee expects investment demand to remain below pre-crisis levels for a while.
The export quantity index was down 8.6 percent year-on-year during January-February; yet, excluding gold, the index remained flat quarter-on-quarter.
The Committee emphasized that the growth outlook for export markets, particularly the euro area, remains weak, and reiterated that the recovery in exports would be gradual, which is also confirmed by the recent trends in leading indicators for exports.
Thus, it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Although employment conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates still remain at high levels.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that non-farm employment continues to recover.
Weak foreign demand continued to restrain industrial employment, while non-farm employment returned to pre-crisis levels owing to the recovery in construction and services sectors.
Nevertheless, the Committee expects unemployment to remain well above pre-crisis levels for a long period, and therefore unit labor costs are not expected to face any significant upside pressures.
In light of above assessments, the Committee has indicated that the economic recovery is ongoing.
The lagged effects of monetary easing on domestic demand have become more pronounced, while the weak outlook for global growth has continued to dampen resource utilization in the tradable sector.
On balance, the Committee continues to expect the economic recovery to be gradual.
The Committee indicated that inflation would hover significantly above the target for sometime owing to the base effects driven by the temporary tax cuts and volatile unprocessed food prices during 2009.
Temporary tax cuts implemented in March 2009, which were withdrawn partly in June and fully in October, would lead to an increase in headline and core inflation rates during March and April, and a decrease during June, July and October of 2010.
Inflation is expected to drop significantly in the last quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011.
The fall in the last quarter of 2010 reflects the base effect driven by the indirect tax hikes and the sharp increase in food prices in the last quarter of 2009.
Similarly, the impact of the tax hikes, which added around 1.9 percentage points to headline inflation in the first two months of 2010, would disappear during the first quarter of 2011.
Accordingly, the Committee stated that inflation would revert back to a downward trend as the temporary factors taper off starting in the last quarter of the year, and converge to levels consistent with the targets by early 2011.
The Committee has underscored that elevated levels of inflation, albeit temporary, warrants close monitoring of price setting behavior.
Several adverse factors (such as unprocessed food and oil price increases, base effects and administered price hikes) have led to a significant increase in inflation since the last quarter of 2009.
Although these factors are temporary, they cause headline inflation to stay at elevated levels for sometime, leading to an adverse impact on inflation expectations.
Currently the pricing behavior, excluding items that are directly affected by cost push effects, does not reveal a deterioration that might endanger the achievement of medium term targets.
However, the Committee underscored that the CBT will not hesitate to take the necessary measures, should inflation expectations continue to rise and lead to a deterioration in general price setting behavior.
Although downside risks on global economic activity have been decreasing, they have not disappeared completely.
Rising budget deficits and ongoing problems in credit, real estate and labor markets across developed economies continue to pose downside risks for the recovery in global activity.
The Committee stated that, should the global conditions deteriorate again, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, the policy rates would be kept constant for an extended period.
The Committee indicated that uncertainties regarding the lagged effects of the strong monetary stimulus have been leading to upside risks on both domestic and global economic activity.
According to the Committee members, the recovery in domestic demand has been relatively robust.
Therefore, a faster- than-envisaged recovery in external demand would lead to a rapid narrowing in the resource utilization gap, which, coupled with cost push pressures, could delay the attainment of medium term inflation targets.
In this respect, it was stated that necessary measures would be taken to ensure the alignment of medium term inflation with the targets, should the recovery in economic activity turn out to be faster than expected.
Prospects regarding the pace of growth in developing economies, especially in China and India, have been posing upside risks regarding commodity prices.
Increasing share of these economies in total world demand has been creating additional pressures on commodity prices.
If commodity prices rise faster than expected in the forthcoming period and delay the disinflation, then the Committee will implement the policies required to eliminate the risks related to price setting behavior.
The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
Since the second half of 2009, economic activity has been stronger than envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP), leading to a better than expected performance in budget revenues.
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the government debt, as implied by the fiscal rule, would facilitate the demand management and ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room to conduct countercyclical monetary policy.
In this respect, the Committee believes that, should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented through institutional and structural progress, such as enacting and establishing the fiscal rule, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels over the medium term.
In light of these assessments, and considering the normalization in the money and credit markets, the Committee has decided to gradually remove the liquidity measures implemented during the crisis.
In this context, the Committee members fully agreed that publishing a comprehensive technical note regarding the exit strategy, the day after the meeting, would enhance predictability of the monetary policy.
However, despite recent improvements, lingering problems across the global economy are not resolved completely.
Accordingly, the Committee has stated that it may be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for sometime, and to keep them at low levels for a long period.
Consumer prices increased by 0.60 percent in April.
Annual inflation was up 0.63 percentage points yielding a rate of 10.19 percent.
The increase in annual CPI inflation and core inflation indicators was largely driven by the low base effect from last year’s tax incentives, as noted in previous reports.
Adjusted for tax changes, underlying inflation remains stable.
Developments particularly in red meat prices have been significantly affecting food prices.
Despite having slowed in March, the rate of increase in unprocessed red meat prices accelerated markedly in April (by 5.77 percent), leading to a further rise in processed meat prices.
Accordingly, as of April, the first round impact of meat prices added a total of 1.9 percentage points to annual CPI inflation.
The measures taken at the end of April regarding meat import regulations are likely to reverse the run-up in meat prices in coming months.
In fact, early observations suggest that unprocessed red meat prices have been slightly down during the first half of May.
Moreover, the massive flow of products into the market indicates that vegetable prices may fall markedly in May.
In this respect, the .
Committee (the Committee) noted that unprocessed food prices may decline significantly in May.
Energy prices remained practically flat during April.
However, annual energy inflation rose by 1.49 percentage points to 11.75 percent on the back of the base effects from falling commodity prices in the first few months of 2009.
Base effects on the annual energy inflation will continue to be strong in May.
The year-on-year increase in core goods prices (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) rose for the second consecutive month owing to the base effect from the tax cuts on durable goods in 2009.
By contrast, the year-on-year increase in other goods prices continued to trend downward to 1.72 percent in May.
Both services prices and the annual rate of increase in services prices decreased amid the sharp drop in communication prices (by 5.36 percent).
Pursuant to the decision of the Information and Communication Technologies Authority, postpaid rates have been reduced, while prepaid plans are now quoted in Turkish lira terms, which led to a sizable decrease in mobile call rates during April.
This brought services inflation down by about 0.9 percentage points.
Meanwhile, soaring meat prices continued to weigh on catering prices, while annual rent inflation continued along a steady downtrend.
Recent data suggest that the recovery in economic activity is ongoing.
Industrial production grew by 0.9 percent month-on-month during March in seasonally adjusted terms.
The industrial production index rose by 17.2 percent year-on-year during the first quarter of 2010, supporting the double- digit growth forecast for the first quarter.
April’s capacity utilization data and other leading indicators point to further recovery in economic activity over the second quarter of 2010.
Yet, with the waning of base effects, annual growth rates would gradually decline after the second quarter.
Domestic demand is following a stable growth trend.
Countercyclical monetary and fiscal policies are having a more noticeable effect on domestic demand, with sectors more sensitive to domestic demand experiencing relatively stronger growth performances.
Sectors with strong linkages to non-durable goods manufacturing and construction have been on the rebound.
Commercial loan and employment data indicate that the recovery is more pronounced in the services sector, which is more sensitive to domestic demand, compared to the industrial sector.
The rise in consumption-related tax intakes as well as the production and import data for consumer goods indicates that private consumption demand continued to grow during the first quarter.
The Committee noted that, after having declined during the second half of 2009 following the tax cut-driven massive first-half increase, domestic sales of automobiles were back on the rise in the first quarter of 2010.
Recent data from consumer confidence indices, new order indices and domestic sales of automobiles suggest that consumption is likely to increase further in the second quarter.
Production and imports data for capital goods indicate that private investment demand continued to recover in the first quarter of 2010.
According to the Business Tendency Survey, the investment sentiment continues to improve, while the Bank Loans’ Tendency Survey reveals that the developments in the investment-driven loan demand has not made a negative contribution to the total business loan demand for the first time in a long while during the first quarter.
Thus, investments are expected to grow moderately further in coming months.
Yet, the global growth outlook continues to dampen economic activity, particularly in sectors that are relatively more sensitive to foreign demand, such as export-oriented industrial sectors and related services sectors.
Therefore, given the weak global growth outlook, insufficient and uncertain aggregate demand is likely to restrain new investments in the manufacturing industry, while investment demand would remain below pre-crisis levels for some time.
Recent developments indicate that uncertainties regarding foreign demand would last for a long period.
The export quantity index was down 2.1 percent year-on-year during the first quarter; yet, excluding gold, there is a gradual recovery in exports.
The Committee emphasized that the growth outlook for export markets has not gained traction yet and the recovery in exports would be gradual, also noting that the exchange rate movements driven by ongoing concerns regarding the Euro area add to the uncertainties regarding foreign demand.
Thus, despite the steady recovery in domestic demand, it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that non-farm employment continued to recover in the first quarter.
Weak foreign demand continued to restrain industrial production, while non-farm employment surpassed pre-crisis levels on the back of the recovery in construction and services sectors.
Nevertheless, the Committee indicated that the high level of unemployment rates compared to pre-crisis levels continue to contain pressures on unit labor costs.
The Committee indicated that the effects of the countercyclical monetary and fiscal policy have been increasingly evident on domestic demand.
Consumer confidence and employment conditions continue to improve, while the production in sectors that are sensitive to domestic demand is displaying a steady uptrend.
This view is supported by the rapid increase in consumption goods imports and the relatively higher capacity utilization in domestically- oriented manufacturing sectors.
Credit market developments also confirm that the recovery in domestic demand has been gaining traction.
Historically low levels of bank lending rates and the gradually easing credit standards since the beginning of the year suggest that credit market conditions have been increasingly supportive of the recovery in domestic demand.
Particularly, the fact that credit extended to small- and medium-sized enterprises has been recovering since the beginning of the year indicates that credit conditions have been normalizing.
The Committee underscored that these favorable developments in credit markets are consistent with CBT’s strategy of gradually withdrawing some of the countercyclical measures adopted during the global crisis.
The Committee stated that market liquidity conditions have evolved as envisaged, and therefore, conditions are appropriate to implement the first step of the technical rate adjustment described in the “.
Exit Strategy” published on the 14th of April 2010.
The Committee observed that current one-week repo auctions rates were fluctuating around 7 percent.
To eliminate such fluctuations, the Committee decided to start conducting one- week repo auctions via quantity auction with fixed interest rate.
In this respect, the one-week repo rate, which becomes the new policy rate, is set at 7 percent—50 basis points above the overnight borrowing rates, as indicated in the exit strategy document.
The Committee emphasized that the recovery in external demand has not gained traction despite the upswing in domestic demand.
Heightened debt sustainability concerns in Greece and many other European countries have been increasing the downside risks regarding the recovery in Europe—our major trade partner.
Moreover, the significant depreciation of the Euro has the potential to adversely affect the competitiveness of exports.
Therefore, considering the lingering uncertainties regarding global economy, the Committee reiterated that it may be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a long period.
In sum, the Committee assessed that aggregate demand conditions are currently not exerting significant upside pressures on inflation.
The rise in annual core inflation indicators during the last two months can be mainly attributed to the base effect stemming from the previous year’s temporary tax cuts on durable consumption goods.
The Committee stated that, excluding tax effects, there is no increase in the underlying inflation trend, and hence, core inflation would continue to remain at levels below the end-year target.
The forecast in the April Inflation Report envisaged that inflation would increase slightly during the second quarter, hover around 10 percent during the third quarter, and decline gradually starting from the fourth quarter as the impacts of the unprocessed food increases and tax hikes die out.
Nevertheless, recent developments suggest that the expected downward correction in vegetable and fruit prices may materialize earlier than envisaged.
In this respect, the Committee noted that unprocessed food prices may display a significant decline in May, bringing inflation to single digit levels.
In other words, inflation in the following months may be lower than predicted in the April Inflation Report.
Moreover, considering the possible impacts of measures regarding meat import regulations as well as the decline in oil prices, the Committee assessed that end-year inflation may be closer to the 6.5 target than forecasted in the Inflation Report.
However, it was stated that the significant gap between inflation expectations and the medium-term targets necessitates close monitoring of the pricing behavior.
Should the fiscal rule—which is to be adopted at the beginning of 2011—be implemented decisively as envisaged, it would contribute to the decline in risk premiums, and by decreasing government borrowing costs enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the government debt, as implied by the fiscal rule, would facilitate demand management and ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room to conduct countercyclical monetary policy.
Consumer prices decreased by 0.36 percent in May and annual inflation declined by 1.09 percentage points to 9.1 percent.
The fall in annual inflation was largely due to plunging unprocessed food prices, as noted in the May summary of the .
Prices in other categories portrayed a favorable outlook as well, while core inflation indicators continued to be consistent with medium-term targets.
Changes in unprocessed food prices had a major impact on food prices in May.
Prices of fresh vegetables dropped by 34.6 percent with the favorable supply conditions.
In addition, the announcement of less restrictive import regulations for red meat brought meat prices down, contributing to the downward pressure on food prices.
Accordingly, the direct impact of meat prices on annual CPI inflation was down from 1.9 in April to 1.6 percentage points in May.
Early observations suggest that the decline in annual food inflation has continued into June.
Despite the recent fall in meat prices, the cumulative increase over the past one year continued to have an adverse impact on catering prices.
On the other hand, annual rent inflation continued to trend steadily down, while falling mobile call rates helped lower the annual rate of increase in prices of services.
Overall, the average rate of increase in prices of services slowed further in seasonally adjusted terms.
Despite rising solid fuel prices, energy prices remained flat for the second consecutive month amid falling international oil prices.
However, annual energy inflation continued to rise on the back of the low base effect from 2009.
The Committee has noted that this base effect-driven increase would end in June, and expects the annual rate of increase in energy prices to decelerate by the second half of 2010 unless there is a sizable increase in oil prices.
The year-on-year increase in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed to 4.84 percent.
Both the easing of commodity prices and the weakening of the euro contributed to the downtrend of annual core goods inflation, leading to some moderation in core inflation indicators.
It should be noted that the base effects from last year’s tax incentives that drove annual core goods inflation higher during March and April would reverse in June, July and October and help improve core inflation indicators.
Industrial production grew by 0.8 percent month-on-month during April in seasonally adjusted terms, up by 2 percent from the first quarter average.
Indicators for May show that the economy continues to recover, albeit more slowly.
Yet, the Committee emphasized that production is still below pre-crisis levels.
Domestic demand growth is relatively stable.
The Committee members noted that production growth is stronger in sectors more sensitive to domestic demand.
Production and imports data indicate that private consumption demand continued to recover moderately during the second quarter.
Consumer confidence indices and new order data also confirm this outlook.
The slow yet steady improvement in the labor market and the favorable credit market developments are supporting the recovery in private consumption demand.
Investment demand continues to recover, although investments remain below pre-crisis levels.
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles continues to grow, while imports of capital goods remain on the rise.
The Committee expects that growing domestic demand and lower commercial loan rates would continue to support the investment recovery.
Yet, the Committee noted that new order and confidence indices fell, albeit modestly, during May and June amid mounting problems in the euro area, and indicated that downside risks to the pace of domestic demand growth should not be underestimated.
Uncertainty regarding foreign demand has been increasing.
The export quantity index excluding gold continued to recover gradually during April in seasonally adjusted terms, whereas recent survey indicators signal slowing export orders.
Medium-term growth outlook of the Euro area has recently been revised down amid severe cutbacks in government spending aiming at restoring budget balances in several European countries.
Therefore, foreign demand is likely to recover gradually, and it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Although employment conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates remain at elevated levels.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that non-farm employment continued to recover in March.
Weak foreign demand continued to restrain industrial employment, while non-farm employment rose further owing to the recovery in construction and services sectors.
Nevertheless, the Committee reiterated that the high level of unemployment rates would continue to contain unit labor costs.
The Committee noted that the fall in unprocessed food prices and easing commodity prices have led to a more favorable inflation outlook than envisaged in the April Inflation Report, which is also having a positive impact on inflation expectations.
Annual unprocessed food inflation is expected to further decline in June.
Committee members have stated that the fall in fruit and vegetable prices partly reflect temporary favorable supply conditions due to early harvest of summer products, while the decline in meat prices can be attributed to more durable factors.
Besides favorable developments in food prices, oil prices have been lower than envisaged in the April Inflation Report, leading to a downward revision in the short-term inflation forecasts.
The Committee members indicated that the favorable outlook in inflation is not only confined to food and energy prices, as core goods and services inflation have been also moderating recently.
It was stated that, given the developments in cost and demand factors, core inflation would remain at levels below the year-end target and consistent with the medium-term targets.
The Committee indicated that countercyclical monetary and fiscal policies have been continuing to support the recovery in economic activity.
Recent data releases suggest that the production in sectors that are sensitive to domestic demand continues to increase.
Credit developments indicate a similar outlook.
The compression of spreads between business lending rates and demand deposit rates and the ongoing recovery in loans to small- and medium-sized enterprises since the beginning of the year, suggest that the credit conditions have been improving steadily.
The Committee indicated that, notwithstanding the relatively stable domestic demand, uncertainties regarding the pace of economic recovery have become more significant.
The significant depreciation of the Euro could adversely affect the competitiveness of exports.
Moreover, these developments have the potential to affect domestic demand adversely through the expectations channel.
In fact, leading indicators suggest that business and consumer confidence have slightly moderated in June.
According to the Committee members, it would be early at this stage to change the stance of the monetary policy; however, the impacts of the problems regarding global economy on the domestic economic activity should be monitored closely in the forthcoming period.
In light of these developments, the Committee reiterated that it may be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a long period.
Using this fiscal space resulting from the cyclical factors mostly to reduce the government debt, as implied by the fiscal rule, would facilitate demand management and ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room to conduct countercyclical monetary policy.
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability.
Consumer prices decreased by 0.56 percent in June and annual inflation declined by 0.73 percentage points to 8.37 percent.
The fall in annual inflation was due to plummeting food prices, as noted in the June summary of the .
Annual services inflation slowed down further, and core inflation indicators continued to be consistent with medium-term targets.
Amid falling unprocessed food prices, annual food inflation sank to 5.62 percent in June—lowest level in recent years.
The ongoing drop in fresh fruit and vegetable prices as well as meat prices also had a major impact on food prices.
With falling processed meat prices in June, the direct impact of meat prices on annual CPI inflation was down 0.2 percentage point month-on-month to 1.4 percentage points.
The slowdown in annual services inflation became more pronounced in June as falling meat prices began to have a favorable effect on catering prices.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted data indicate that prices decelerated across all categories of services.
Annual rent inflation continued to trend steadily down, declining to an unprecedented low of 4.21 percent since the inception of the CPI.
The Committee has noted that the year-ago increase in tobacco prices would have a base effect on the annual rate of increase in July’s consumer prices.
If tobacco prices remain unchanged in July, this base effect will drive annual CPI inflation down by about 0.5 percentage point.
The effect of rising solid fuel and tap water prices on energy group prices was broadly offset by the fall in fuel prices amid lower international oil prices, producing only a modest increase in energy prices in June.
However, with the waning of the upward base effects that the Committee noted in the June Summary, annual energy inflation dropped by 1.61 percentage points to 12.63 percent.
Unless international oil prices rise dramatically, the annual rate of increase in energy prices would continue to slow in the second half of 2010.
The year-on-year rate of increase in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed to 4.38 percent with the reversal of the base effect from last year’s tax incentives on durable goods.
The Committee has reiterated that the tax impact would continue to have a downward impact on annual core goods inflation in July and October.
Moreover, Committee members have emphasized that, even when adjusted for tax effects and seasonal variations, the rate of increase in prices of core goods has been decelerating.
The Committee has noted that annual headline inflation would display a significant drop in July due to aforementioned base effects.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 11.7 percent year-on-year during the first quarter owing primarily to the low base in the comparable period last year.
In fact, growing by a mere 0.1 percent quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, GDP remained virtually flat.
The Committee has noted the large contraction in public construction investments, and indicated that economic activity continues to pick up once the impact of the public sector demand is excluded.
Industrial production increased by 1.9 percent month-on-month during May in seasonally adjusted terms, up by 3 percent from the first-quarter average during April-May.
The Committee has indicated that production has surpassed pre-crisis levels in sectors more sensitive to domestic demand but still remains low in sectors relatively more sensitive to foreign demand.
Domestic demand is displaying relatively stable growth.
April-May data on production and imports indicate that the demand for consumer goods has been running above its previous quarter average.
Consumer confidence indices and new orders data also point to a further increase in private consumption.
Therefore, the Committee expects private consumption demand to grow further quarter-on-quarter during the second quarter but slow down year-on-year as impacts of the low base effect fades.
Investment demand continues to recover, but remains below pre-crisis levels.
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles continues to grow steadily, while imports of capital goods remain on the rise.
Production and imports data suggest that private investments would increase significantly year-on-year during the second quarter of 2010.
Yet, the Committee has stated that the recently increased downside risks to foreign demand owing to the problems in the euro area might dampen new investments, particularly in the manufacturing industry.
There are signs of a partial slowdown in foreign demand.
The export quantity index excluding gold rose for the fourth consecutive month in May, although recent readings indicate that the massive second-quarter increase in exports may not be durable.
According to the data from the Turkish Exporters Assembly, despite having expanded by 13.1 percent year-on-year in June, exports were down month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms.
Moreover, recent survey indicators for the manufacturing industry signal slowing export orders.
The Committee has reiterated that the downside risks to the pace of foreign demand growth have risen amid the fiscal crisis in the euro area—Turkey’s largest export destination—and emphasized that the depreciation of the euro is another factor that would impede exports.
While the July Consensus Forecasts do not offer a major change in euro area growth rates, there are significant compositional changes.
Specifically, the decreased contribution of consumption and investment expenditures, especially in countries such as Germany and Italy, implies a weaker outlook for foreign demand of Turkey.
The Committee has noted that these developments are likely to have an adverse impact on Turkey’s economic activity in coming months, implying that it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre- crisis levels.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that non-farm employment continued to recover in April.
Weak foreign demand continued to restrain industrial employment, while non-farm employment returned to pre- crisis levels owing to the recovery in construction and services sectors.
The Committee discussed the macroeconomic outlook and monetary policy stance underlying the baseline scenario of the July Inflation Report.
In light of the developments summarized above, the Committee members indicated that it would be appropriate to base the revised forecasts on a framework in which external demand conditions are weaker compared to the previous Report, while domestic demand continues to recover as anticipated, resource utilization stays at low levels, and thus the contribution of aggregate demand conditions to disinflation increases slightly.
The Committee has indicated that the core inflation indicators remain consistent with the medium term targets.
This development, coupled with the fall in unprocessed food prices and easing commodity prices, has led to a more favorable inflation outlook than envisaged in the April Inflation Report.
In sum, the Committee members agreed that the baseline scenario in the July Inflation Report would envisage that the monetary tightening required to keep inflation in line with medium-term targets would start later and would be more limited compared to the previous forecast.
Accordingly, the Committee reiterated that it may be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a long period.
The Committee stated that risks regarding global economy persist.
By influencing commodity prices and external demand conditions, global economic activity would continue to be the main factor driving inflation dynamics and the monetary policy outlook.
In this respect, the Committee indicated that the timing and the extent of monetary tightening to be implemented during 2011 under the baseline scenario of the July Inflation Report may change depending on the course of the economic activity.
Recently, rising concerns regarding debt sustainability in several euro-zone countries and the spillover effects to the financial system have led to renewed turmoil across financial markets, underscoring the downside risks to the global economic recovery.
Furthermore, ongoing problems in credit, real estate and labor markets across developed economies, with little policy options left in case of another disruption to global economic activity, suggest that the downside risks regarding the pace of global growth are likely to persist for some time.
The Committee indicated that, should the global economy face a longer-than-anticipated period of anemic growth, which would consequently delay the domestic recovery significantly, the monetary tightening envisaged in 2011 under the baseline scenario may be postponed towards the end of 2011.
Moreover, it was stated that, an outcome whereby global economic problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity, may trigger a new easing cycle.
By contrast, the Committee members underscored that, monetary tightening may be implemented in an earlier period during 2011, should the recovery in economic activity turn out to be faster than expected.
The Committee members indicated that, despite the increased downside risks pertaining to external demand, domestic demand remains strong.
Although problems regarding the global economy have the potential to restrain domestic demand through confidence and financing channels, countercyclical monetary policy and the ongoing improvement in employment conditions are likely to support the recovery in domestic demand.
On the other hand, given the relative improvement in the creditworthiness of Turkey during the post-crisis period, a possible strengthening in capital inflows in the forthcoming period stands out as another factor that may lead to a faster recovery in the domestic demand in contrast to external demand.
Should the divergence in the growth rates between domestic and external demand continue in the forthcoming period, it would be necessary to utilize other policy instruments such as reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management facilities more effectively.
Accordingly, if the composition of strong domestic demand and weak external demand continue as envisaged, and if this pattern of growth coexists with rapid credit expansion and a deterioration in the current account balance, consequently leading to financial stability concerns, than the Committee may bring forward the measures outlined in the exit strategy that are expected to be implemented until the end of 2010.
Since the second half of 2009, economic activity has been stronger than envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP), leading to a better-than-expected performance in budget revenues.
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the government debt would facilitate demand management and reduce any need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclical monetary policy.
In this respect, should the fiscal discipline implemented through institutional and structural improvements, such as enacting and establishing the fiscal rule, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single-digit levels over the medium term.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the MTP and the European Union accession process remains to be of utmost importance.
Consumer prices decreased by 0.48 percent in July and annual inflation declined by 0.79 percentage points to 7.58 percent.
The fall in annual inflation was largely due to the base effects from the tax hikes on tobacco and durable goods a year ago, as noted in the July summary of the .
Annual services and core goods inflation continued to moderate and core inflation indicators remained in line with medium-term targets.
Unprocessed food prices continued to fall in July, albeit at a slower pace than in the past two months, and annual food inflation declined to 5.52 percent.
The changes in food prices were mainly attributable to the seasonal drop in vegetable prices, while meat prices were back on the rise after a two-month break.
Accordingly, the contribution of meat prices to annual inflation increased to 1.6 percentage points.
Observations for August suggest that the annual rate of increase in unprocessed food prices may accelerate because of higher fruit prices.
The lowering of customs duties on imported livestock is expected to contain the unprocessed food inflation over the remainder of the year.
Annual services inflation continues to trend downwards.
In seasonally adjusted terms, inflation across all services categories is seen to be slowing down.
The favorable developments in food and energy prices ease the cost pressures on services prices.
The annual rate of increase in services prices, excluding the relatively more demand-sensitive catering and transport services, dropped to 3.46 percent, an all-time low since the inception of the CPI.
Energy prices remained flat in July.
Fuel prices remained broadly unchanged in line with international oil prices, while solid fuel prices continued to rise, albeit more slowly.
The annual rate of increase in energy prices is expected to fall in coming months due to base effects.
The year-on-year rate of increase in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed to 3.74 percent owing to the base effects from last year’s tax cuts on durable goods.
Moreover, the tax-adjusted annual rate of increase in core goods prices remained unchanged at 2.4 percent.
The Committee has noted that the recent increase in international wheat and cotton prices would have implications for consumer prices, particularly for food prices and the clothing industry, respectively.
In fact, annual inflation in clothing prices has been on an uptrend recently.
On the other hand, in view of domestic wheat production estimates and available domestic stocks, the Committee expects that rising international wheat prices would have a limited impact on inflation.
On balance, the Committee has reiterated that inflation would increase temporarily in the short term before reverting back to a declining path by the last quarter of the year.
Recent data suggest that the recovery in economic activity has slowed down.
With the waning recovery, industrial production fell by 2.1 percentage points month-on-month in June, which is the deepest monthly contraction since April 2009.
The Committee has emphasized that the contraction has been more pronounced in manufacturing industries which are sensitive to foreign demand.
July’s survey indicators show an ongoing decline in industrial orders expectations.
Despite having increased month-on-month in July, capacity utilization rates continue to hover around low levels.
Therefore, the Committee has concluded that the June drop in production is temporary, but that downside risks regarding the pace of recovery remain.
Domestic demand displays a relatively stable outlook.
Second-quarter data on production and imports indicate that private consumption demand slowed quarter-on-quarter.
The recent flattening of July’s survey indicators and consumer confidence indices shows that there has not been a surge in consumer spending as of the early part of the third quarter.
Yet, the Committee has noted that the May-July data largely reflect the effects of the euro area debt crisis, and therefore the slowdown in domestic demand may be transitory.
In fact, the steady increase in consumer loans during July shows that monetary conditions remain accommodative.
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles and the imports of capital goods continue to grow.
Yet, the Committee has stated that the recently increased uncertainty about the pace of recovery in foreign demand might dampen new investments, particularly in the manufacturing industry.
There are signs of a moderate slowdown in foreign demand.
The Committee, in its previous meeting, had emphasized the potential impacts of the adverse developments across key export destinations on economic activity.
In fact, the export quantity index excluding gold declined markedly in June following a rise for four consecutive months.
Recent foreign trade data suggest that exports remained relatively weak in July and August.
Moreover, survey indicators of manufacturing industry do not indicate a significant acceleration in export orders.
Therefore, the Committee expects that it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to their pre-crisis levels.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that non-farm employment continued to recover in May, albeit more slowly.
The employment recovery was primarily driven by the industrial sector, while employment growth in services slowed down.
The Committee has noted that the weaker foreign demand conditions could dampen the labor market and thus the recovery in domestic demand in coming months.
In this respect, the Committee has reiterated that the unemployment rates would continue to remain at higher levels compared to pre-crisis period for sometime, containing the unit labor costs.
The Committee has assessed that recent data releases are in line with the outlook presented in the July Inflation Report.
Although domestic demand has slowed down moderately since April owing to the problems in the euro area, it is expected that domestic demand would continue to display a relatively stable outlook bolstered by the supportive monetary conditions.
Recent credit surveys on the second quarter suggest that demand for both consumer and commercial loans has continued to increase.
Moreover, ongoing deposit growth and improving conditions regarding banks’ access to external credit are supportive for credit expansion.
The Committee has restated that inflation would increase temporarily in the near term before reverting to a declining path starting from the last quarter of the year.
Inflation is expected to display a significant rise in August due to sharp increases in fruit prices, but then trend downwards in the last quarter with the support of a reversal in last year’s food price base effects.
Core inflation indicators are expected to remain consistent with the medium-term targets.
In light of these developments, the Committee reiterated that it would be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a long period.
regarding the global economy remain.
Data releases on global economic activity have increased the uncertainties regarding the pace of the recovery.
Ongoing problems in credit, real estate and labor markets across developed economies, with concerns regarding the sustainability of public debt decreasing the room for countercyclical policy are key factors underpinning the downside risks regarding global economic activity.
The Committee members have stated that, should problems in the global economy further intensify, thereby increasing the possibility of a domestic recession, a new easing cycle may be considered.
The Committee has assessed that conditions are appropriate to gradually implement the measures outlined in the exit strategy as envisaged.
However, there are risks that could necessitate bringing forward or delaying the measures outlined in the exit strategy.
Recently, strengthening perceptions that developed economies will keep their policy rates at low levels for a long period, together with ample liquidity conditions have led to a surge in capital flows toward emerging markets.
Given the relative improvement in the creditworthiness of Turkey during the post-crisis period, it is possible that capital inflows may further increase in the forthcoming period.
Such a development would exacerbate the divergence between the pace of recovery in the domestic demand and external demand.
If this pattern of growth coexists with rapid credit expansion and a deterioration in the current account balance, consequently leading to financial stability concerns, it would be necessary to utilize other policy instruments such as reserve requirement ratios and liquidity tools more effectively.
Accordingly, the Committee may bring forward the measures outlined in the exit strategy that were envisaged to be implemented by end-2010.
By contrast, should the uncertainties regarding global economy intensify and consequently dampen domestic demand, these measures may be implemented at a later period.
The Committee has indicated that recent volatility in commodity prices pose risks regarding short-term inflation forecasts.
Although ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy continue to suppress energy and industrial metal prices, climate conditions are having an adverse impact on agricultural commodities.
In fact, recently, the prices of wheat and cotton, which are important inputs for core consumer goods, have displayed rapid increases.
At this stage, the Committee does not view these developments as a threat toward attaining the medium-term targets, but acknowledges the need to monitor commodity prices closely.
The Central Bank monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
The Committee members have indicated that the delay in the enactment of the fiscal rule has increased the importance of current fiscal policy implementation.
Budget realizations in the first half of 2010 suggest that the better-than-expected performance in budget revenues, due to stronger economic activity than envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP), is largely being used to reduce government debt.
Sustaining fiscal discipline in the period ahead as well is crucial, both in terms of providing more flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclical monetary policy, and also for keeping the market interest rates at low levels permanently.
In this respect, the Committee will continue to monitor the fiscal developments and their impact on inflation outlook closely.
Should fiscal discipline be implemented through institutional and structural improvements, rather than indirect tax hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single-digit levels over the medium- term.
Consumer prices increased by 0.40 percent in August and annual inflation rose by 0.75 percentage points to 8.33 percent.
The rise in annual inflation was largely due to increasing unprocessed food prices, as noted in the August summary of the .
Annual services inflation continued to moderate, while core inflation indicators remained in line with medium-term targets.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages soared by 4.85 percentage points to 10.37 percent.
After having declined for three months in a row, unprocessed food prices rose sharply in August amid higher fresh fruit and vegetable prices, bringing unprocessed food inflation up by 10.78 percentage points to 18.66 percent year-on-year.
Moreover, unprocessed meat prices continued to rise, while changes in processed food prices remained modest.
The Committee members have noted that the extreme volatility in food prices might continue to have a significant impact on annual inflation in the short run.
In fact, leading indicators suggest that annual inflation would rise markedly in September owing to the sharp increases in unprocessed food prices driven by higher vegetable prices.
The Committee expects the upsurge to be temporary and annual inflation to be back on a downtrend by October.
Annual inflation in core goods and services continued to fall steadily in August.
The annual rate of increase in prices of the relatively more demand-sensitive services which exclude catering and transport services, dropped to an all-time low of 2.83 percent.
Similarly, the annual rate of increase in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) continued to fall.
The Committee has noted that annual core goods inflation declined to 2.2 percent in tax-adjusted terms.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted data indicate that underlying inflation is in line with medium-term targets.
Against this background, the Committee has restated that inflation would increase temporarily in the short term before reverting to a declining path starting from the last quarter of the year.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 10.3 percent year-on-year and by a seasonally adjusted 3.7 percent quarter-on-quarter during the second quarter.
The Committee has noted that the public construction investment made a significant contribution to the acceleration in quarterly GDP growth.
However, it was also stated that, even excluding public expenditures, the economy still recovered at a faster pace than in the first quarter.
Economic activity is on a milder recovery path following the strong growth in the second quarter.
July and August data indicate that the economy slowed markedly in the third quarter.
Industrial production ran below its second- quarter average in July, while August’s capacity utilization rates pointed to a further slowdown in production.
However, the Committee has emphasized that the August data may not be indicative of underlying economic activity as the month was marked by Ramadan and political uncertainty generated by the September referendum.
In fact, new order indicators, which feed into industrial production after a two- to three-month lag, showed some recovery in August.
July data indicate that production and imports of consumer goods have been more robust than the second-quarter average.
July-August survey indicators and consumer confidence indices show that the consumption continues to recover steadily in the third quarter without an acceleration.
Investment demand continues to rebound, but remains below pre-crisis levels.
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles and the imports of capital goods grew further in July.
The steady improvement in firms’ investment expectations suggests that investments may continue to recover over the upcoming period.
Yet, the Committee has stated that the uncertainty about the pace of recovery in foreign demand might continue to dampen new investments, particularly in the manufacturing industry.
Uncertainties regarding foreign demand persist.
The export quantity index excluding gold continued to fall in July.
Recent foreign trade data indicate that exports grew modestly in August and September.
Survey indicators of manufacturing industry do not report a major increase in exports.
Therefore, in view of signs of slowing economic recovery across the globe, the Committee expects that it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Industrial employment continued to recover in June, while services employment fell slightly in seasonally adjusted terms.
Leading indicators for the third quarter suggest that the halt in non-farm employment growth is temporary and employment would continue to rise gradually.
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that the unemployment rates would continue to remain at higher levels compared to the pre-crisis period for some time, containing the unit labor costs.
Committee members noted that although GDP growth was strong during the second quarter, recent data releases suggest a relatively modest recovery for the second half of the year.
External demand continues to suppress aggregate demand, notwithstanding the steady increases in domestic demand.
Employment and capacity utilization indicators suggest that upside pressures on inflation are likely to be contained.
Accordingly, core inflation indicators are expected to remain consistent with the medium-term targets.
In light of these developments, the Committee has reiterated that it would be necessary to maintain policy rate at current levels for some time, and to keep it at low levels for a long period.
Although the Committee does not see an acceleration in aggregate demand, the continued divergence between external and domestic demand necessitates that the composition of demand be closely monitored especially in terms of risks regarding the current account balance and financial stability.
The strengthening perceptions that developed economies would keep their policy rates at low levels for a long period, and relative improvement in Turkish creditworthiness during the post-crisis period, combined with the surge in capital flows toward emerging markets, have been increasing the risks regarding the divergence between the domestic and external demand.
While not yet a significant concern regarding financial stability, the Committee members have indicated that these developments support the implementation of the “exit strategy” measures.
Therefore, the Committee has indicated that it would be appropriate to proceed with the measures outlined in the exit strategy that were envisaged to be implemented by end-2010.
Therefore, also noting that the liquidity conditions have evolved as envisaged, the Committee has decided to implement the second step of the technical rate adjustment mentioned in Article (b) of the 16th paragraph in the “.
Exit Strategy” document published on the 14th of April 2010, and decided to widen the gap between the one-week repo rate and the overnight borrowing rate by 25 basis points.
Moreover, as reiterated in the exit strategy document, both the gap between the overnight lending and borrowing rates and the gap between these rates and the one-week repo rate could be used as operational tools of monetary policy.
In this respect, in order to decrease the overfunding to the market and leave less end-day excess liquidity, there could be another reduction in the borrowing rates in the forthcoming period.
The Committee members have indicated that the global crisis has demonstrated the importance of central banks having an auxiliary financial stability mandate as well as the objective of price stability.
In this context it was reiterated that, should the recent surge in capital flows coexist with rapid credit expansion and a deterioration in the current account balance, thereby leading to financial stability concerns, other policy instruments such as reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management facilities would be utilized more effectively.
The Committee members underscored that, as stated in the 19th paragraph of the exit strategy document, depending on future developments—for example, if the pace of credit expansion exceeds desired levels—reserve requirement ratios may be used more actively as a macroprudential tool.
In this framework, it was stated that, terminating the remuneration of Turkish lira required reserves would facilitate the effective use of reserve requirement ratios as a policy tool to mitigate macroeconomic and financial risks when necessary.
The Committee has indicated that the recent volatility in commodity prices pose risks regarding short-term inflation forecasts.
Although the uncertainty regarding the global economy continues to suppress energy and industrial metal prices, climate conditions are having an adverse impact on agricultural commodities.
Ongoing increases in the prices of wheat and cotton, which are inputs for core consumer goods, necessitate the need to monitor commodity prices closely.
The Committee members stated that the significant fluctuations in food prices are the main factors increasing inflation volatility.
Early indicators suggest that inflation would display a significant temporarily jump in September owing to rapid increases in unprocessed food prices.
The Committee foresees that vegetable and fruit prices would display a partial correction in the last quarter of the year, and the measures taken regarding meat imports would contain the increases in unprocessed food prices.
Nevertheless, it was stated that fluctuations in unprocessed food prices continue to pose risks regarding short- term inflation forecasts.
Budget realizations in the first eight months of 2010 suggest that extra revenues arising due to stronger-than- envisaged economic activity are largely being used to reduce government debt.
Sustaining fiscal discipline in the period ahead by bolstering institutional and structural improvements is crucial, both in terms of providing more flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclical monetary policy, and also for keeping the market interest rates at low levels permanently.
Consumer prices picked up by 1.23 percent in September and annual inflation rose by 0.91 percentage points to 9.24 percent.
The rise in annual inflation was due to the sharp increase in unprocessed food prices.
Inflation was generally moderate across all other subcategories.
While annual services inflation continued to decrease steadily, core inflation indicators remained in line with medium-term targets.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 4.96 percentage points to 15.33 percent in September due to continued upswings in unprocessed food prices.
As noted in the September summary of the .
Committee (the Committee) meeting, the steep rise in vegetable prices pushed food and nonalcoholic beverages prices higher.
Moreover, unprocessed meat prices continued to increase in September.
Thus, annual unprocessed food inflation increased by 20.89 percent over two months, bringing annual inflation in this subgroup to an all-time high of 28.74 percent.
Meanwhile, processed food inflation remained subdued despite higher processed meat prices.
However, the recent increase in domestic wheat prices driven by rising global wheat prices continues to put upward pressure on processed food prices.
Energy prices rose slightly in September, while annual energy inflation continued to decline.
Inflation in core goods and services remained broadly contained.
The annual rate of increase in the prices of services excluding catering and transport, which are relatively more demand-sensitive, dropped to an all-time low of 1.85 percent.
Similarly, the annual rate of increase in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) prices continued to fall.
Moreover, recent figures on seasonally adjusted inflation data indicate that underlying inflation remains in line with medium- term targets.
The base effects from the temporary 2009 tax incentives on durable goods would serve to bring annual inflation down in October.
Against this backdrop, the Committee has reiterated that inflation would be on a declining path in the forthcoming period.
Recent data releases suggest that the economy continues to recover.
Industrial production grew by a seasonally adjusted 2.7 percent month-on- month in August and by 1.0 percent compared to the previous quarter during July-August.
Taking into account the July-August developments as well as the September and the fourth quarter leading indicators, industrial production growth is expected to slow in the third quarter, but then accelerate in the fourth quarter.
However, the Committee has noted that, despite posting quarterly gains since the second quarter of 2009, industrial production is still running below pre-crisis levels.
Domestic demand displays a relatively stronger outlook.
Both the July-August data on the production and imports of consumer goods and the September survey indicators show that private consumption demand continued to recover steadily during the third quarter.
Moreover, the improvement in consumer confidence indicates that private consumption demand would remain robust in the final quarter.
In addition, investments are expected to recover further in the third quarter and grow markedly year-on-year.
In fact, indices for the production and imports of investment goods increased during July-August compared to the previous quarter, while firms’ investment expectations continued to improve steadily over these two months and rose sharply in September.
Yet, the Committee has stated that the uncertainty about foreign demand might dampen investment growth, particularly in the manufacturing industry.
Uncertainty regarding foreign demand remains elevated.
After falling in June and July, the export quantity index excluding gold moved up in August yet remained below its level in May.
According to recent foreign trade data, exports grew slightly in September and October, with new manufacturing orders following a similar pattern.
Amid weak foreign demand underpinned by signs of slowing global trade and projections of a slowdown in the pace of the global recovery, the Committee reiterated that it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre-crisis levels.
Although employment conditions continue to improve, unemployment rates still remain elevated.
Industrial employment continued to recover in June, whereas services employment dropped slightly in seasonally adjusted terms.
Third- quarter leading indicators suggest that the halt in non-farm employment growth is temporary and employment would continue to rise gradually.
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that the unemployment rates would remain higher than pre-crisis levels for some time, containing unit labor costs.
The Committee has assessed the inflation forecasts and the economic outlook to be presented in the Inflation Report.
In line with the developments outlined above, inflation forecasts were based on an outlook which envisages that domestic demand is stronger compared to the previous period, external demand continues to restrain economic activity, and thus aggregate demand conditions continue to support disinflation, albeit to a lesser degree.
Therefore, it is expected that inflation would be on a declining path in the forthcoming period, while core inflation would remain consistent with the medium-term targets.
In light of these assessments, the Committee has reiterated that it would be necessary to maintain policy rates at current levels for some time, and to keep them at low levels for a long period.
On the other hand, in order to enhance the efficient functioning of the Turkish lira market, the Committee has decided to reduce the borrowing rates by 50 basis points.
Developments regarding global economic activity would continue to be the main factor driving inflation dynamics and the monetary policy outlook.
Recently, leading indicators of economic activity continue to slow down, underscoring downside risks especially regarding the US economy.
Furthermore, ongoing problems in credit, real estate, and labor markets across developed economies and the uncertainties regarding the impact of fiscal consolidations suggest that the downside risks regarding the pace of global growth are likely to persist for some time.
The Committee stated that, should the global economy face a longer-than-anticipated period of anemic growth, the monetary tightening envisaged during the final quarter of 2011 under the baseline scenario of the October Inflation Report may be postponed.
Moreover, it was indicated that an outcome whereby global economic problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity, may trigger a new easing cycle.
By contrast, it was underscored that monetary tightening may be implemented in an earlier period, should the recovery in economic activity turn out to be faster than expected.
Expectations of more accommodative monetary policies in developed economies have been leading to a surge in capital flows toward emerging markets.
This development, coupled with the relative improvement in the creditworthiness of Turkey, exacerbates the risks related to the divergence between the domestic and external demand.
While not yet a significant concern regarding financial stability, the Committee has indicated that these developments support the implementation of the “exit strategy” measures.
Therefore, the Committee has indicated that it would be appropriate to proceed with the remaining measures outlined in the exit strategy that were envisaged to be implemented by the end of 2010.
Moreover, the Committee has judged that the 3-month repo funding is no longer needed.
Should the capital inflows continue, the divergence in the growth rates between domestic and external demand is likely to intensify in the forthcoming period.
Additional policy instruments, other than the short-term policy rates, would be needed to curb risks emanating from this channel.
In this respect, the Committee stated that, should the disparity between domestic demand and external demand continue, it would be necessary to utilize other policy instruments such as reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management facilities more effectively, to address financial stability concerns including rapid credit expansion and a deterioration in the current account balance.
Food and commodity price inflation has accelerated recently.
The existing output gap and the strength of the Turkish lira has been limiting the pass- through from food and commodity prices to the prices of core goods and services.
However, potential second-round effects continue to be a risk, if the increases in food and commodity prices persist.
The Committee indicated that, should such a risk materialize and lead to a deterioration in the price setting behavior which in turn hampers the attainment of medium-term inflation targets, an earlier-than-envisaged tightening in the baseline scenario would be considered.
The CBT continues to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
Increasing government saving under the present circumstances is essential to control the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and external demand.
The Medium Term Program (MTP) is seen as an important step toward this direction.
Accordingly, our revised forecasts take the projections of the government expenditures in the MTP as given, while tax adjustments are assumed to be consistent with the inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms.
The Committee stated that, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on inflation outlook, a revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered.
In October, consumer prices were up 1.83 percent, while annual inflation was down 0.62 percentage points to 8.62 percent due to base effects.
Although unprocessed food prices continued to soar dramatically, inflation remained broadly subdued across all other subcategories.
Annual services inflation continued to decrease steadily, and core inflation indicators remained consistent with medium-term targets.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.75 percentage points to 17.08 percent in October.
Thus, food prices added 4.67 percentage points to annual inflation.
Having soared in August and September on escalating vegetable prices, unprocessed food prices continued to rise sharply in October.
Specifically, tomato prices increased sharply by 112 percent due to the supply shortage during the shift from field crops to greenhouse crops, driving inflation up by 0.85 percentage points in October.
Meanwhile, unprocessed red meat prices continued to rise, albeit more slowly.
Accordingly, annual unprocessed food inflation climbed to an all-time high of 31.28 percent.
Bread and grains prices in the processed food group have recently been affected by higher wheat prices.
Moreover, prices for other processed food products, especially processed meat products, have increased rapidly over the past two months.
The cumulative increase in both red meat and wheat prices continues to put cost pressure on processed food prices.
Inflation in core goods and services remains contained.
Although rising food prices continues to weigh on catering services, prices for services other than catering and transport remain flat for the third consecutive month.
The base effects from the 2009 tax incentives on durable goods faded out in October.
Thus, the annual rate of increase in prices of core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed to a record 1.25 percent.
As a result, annual inflation captured by core price measures declined to around 2.5 to 3 percent year-on-year.
Against this backdrop, the Committee expects the annual change of unprocessed food prices to fall significantly in coming months.
At the same time, inflation is expected to decrease markedly as the influence of tobacco price base effects diminishes during the beginning of 2011.
Core inflation might rise modestly in the forthcoming period, but is expected to remain around levels consistent with the medium-term targets.
Recent data releases suggest that economic activity continues to recover with the support of domestic demand.
Industrial production grew by a seasonally adjusted 1.2 percent quarter-on-quarter in the third quarter, recording a more moderate recovery than in the first half of the year.
Yet, in view of the rapid recovery in domestic demand leading indicators, the Committee has stated that the economy is set to regain momentum in the last quarter.
Confidence indices and new order indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to recover.
Three-month ahead expectations for total new orders were more upbeat during September and October due to strong domestic market conditions.
Moreover, the Committee has noted that consumer confidence continues to improve, while investment appetite has grown further and stabilized at higher levels, and emphasized that domestic demand continues to grow at a faster pace than foreign demand in the final quarter.
Uncertainties regarding external demand persist.
Exports remained subdued in October, while indicators for export orders showed no sign of a strong recovery in the short term.
Furthermore, there remain downside risks to the pace of recovery in the global economy.
Therefore, the Committee expects that it would take a long time before industrial capacity utilization rates return to their pre-crisis levels, due to the weak external demand outlook.
Non-farm employment growth paused in the third quarter, owing to the slowdown in the services sector.
Committee members have noted that labor market developments are consistent with the third- quarter slowdown in production, and expect that employment growth will resume in line with the end-year economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that unemployment rates would remain higher than pre-crisis levels for some time, containing unit labor costs.
The Committee expects the weakening in the economic activity and employment indicators in the third quarter to be temporary.
According to the Committee members, especially credit volume and domestic demand follow a strong trend, nevertheless aggregate demand conditions do not exert upside pressures on inflation yet due to weak external demand.
Moreover, the Committee has indicated that 5 percentage points of inflation, which was at 8.62 percent as of October, can be attributed to the direct effects of the unprocessed food and tobacco prices, which are both expected to decelerate in the forthcoming period.
Therefore, it is expected that inflation would be on a declining path in the forthcoming period, while core inflation indicators would remain consistent with the medium-term targets.
In light of these assessments, the Committee has reiterated that it would be necessary to maintain the policy rate at current levels for some time, and to keep it at low levels for a long period.
Although aggregate demand conditions support the stance of keeping policy rates at low levels for a long period of time, the developments in the composition of the demand necessitates the active use of other policy tools.
The weakness in global economic outlook not only delays the recovery in the external demand but also leads to further expansionary policies across developed economies, which in turn fuels domestic demand through the acceleration in capital inflows to emerging markets.
The surge in capital inflows exacerbates the divergence between the growth rates of domestic and external demand, widening the current account deficit through rapid credit growth and increasing import demand, thereby highlighting the risks regarding financial stability.
The Committee once again underscored that, to limit such risks, other policy instruments such as reserve requirement ratios and liquidity management facilities may be used more effectively as macroprudential tools.
In order to encourage the lengthening of the maturities in Turkish lira money market transactions, the Committee has decided to allow overnight interest rates to diverge from the policy rate temporarily, when needed.
To this end, the Committee has decided to widen the gap between lending and borrowing rates by reducing the borrowing rates by 400 basis points.
Moreover, observing the favorable developments in credit conditions, the Committee has indicated that it would be appropriate to proceed with the remaining measures outlined in the exit strategy.
Commodity prices continue to pose risks regarding the inflation outlook.
The Committee members have highlighted the sharp increases in agricultural commodity prices such as cotton and wheat.
The existing output gap and the strength of the Turkish lira have been limiting the pass-through from agricultural commodity prices to the prices of core goods and services.
However, the Committee stated that the impact of the commodity prices on the general price setting behavior should be closely monitored.
Increasing government savings—and therefore maintaining fiscal discipline—under the present circumstances is essential to control the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and external demand.
The Committee members see the Medium Term Program (MTP) as an important step toward this direction.
Accordingly, inflation forecasts presented in the latest inflation report take the projections of the fiscal variables in the MTP as given, which envisages that, after a temporary acceleration in the final quarter of the year, the ratio of government expenditures to GDP would decline gradually starting from 2011.
The Committee stated that, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the inflation outlook, a revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered.
In November, consumer prices were up 0.03 percent, while annual inflation was down 1.33 percentage points to 7.29 percent largely owing to the downward correction in unprocessed food prices, as stated in the summary of the November .
Meanwhile, prices of core goods and services remained favorable.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages decreased by 4.7 percentage points to 12.39 percent in November.
Thus, the contribution of food prices to annual inflation slowed to 3.41 percentage points.
After soaring dramatically over the past three months, unprocessed food prices slumped in November amid falling vegetable prices.
Leading indicators suggest that this downtrend would continue into December.
Processed food prices continued to rise in November.
Processed meat prices rose further due to the lagged effects of previous increases in unprocessed meat prices.
Prices of bread and cereals remained on an upward trend amid rising wheat prices.
Prices of other processed food items, especially solid and liquid fats, were also on the rise in November.
Fuel prices continue to rise amid higher international oil prices.
Yet, the annual rate of increase in energy prices continued to fall in November on the back of base effects.
Prices of alcoholic beverages increased by 16.2 percent due to the special consumption tax hike, but this increase made only a limited contribution to consumer inflation.
Core goods and services inflation remained muted, as expected.
Annual services inflation increased slightly due to higher prices of transport services, while the annual rate of increase in services other than catering and transport continued to hover around all-time lows.
Annual inflation in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed further to 1.04 percent.
Accordingly, despite a slight increase, core inflation indicators remained on track with medium-term targets.
With the additional support of falling unprocessed food prices, the Committee expects inflation to decline in the forthcoming period.
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators are expected to increase slightly, but remain below medium-term targets.
Recent releases regarding economic activity have been consistent with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 5.5 percent year-on-year in the third quarter.
The pace of economic recovery slowed in the third quarter due to the lagged effects of the distress in European economies ongoing since May, and consequently, GDP increased by 1.1 percent quarter-on-quarter.
This slowdown was largely driven by the negative contribution of exports of goods and services to quarterly GDP growth, while domestic demand continued to grow rapidly.
Economic activity continues to recover amid strong domestic demand.
Industrial production grew by a dramatic 3.1 percent month-on-month in October in seasonally adjusted terms and remained significantly above the average of the previous quarter.
November's capacity utilization rate and expectations for new orders suggest that production has recovered at a faster pace than in the third quarter.
This outlook is recently supported by both the sharp increases in domestic sales of automobiles and commercial vehicles and the improvement in investment and consumer confidence indices.
These developments confirm the Committee's expectation of a renewed acceleration in economic activity for the final quarter of 2010.
Although exports of goods were higher than the third-quarter average during October and November, indicators for new orders show no sign of a strong recovery in the short term.
Weak foreign demand continues to suppress particularly industrial production.
Therefore, the Committee expects that it would take a long time before industrial capacity utilization rates return to their pre-crisis levels.
Employment conditions continue to improve, yet unemployment rates remain at high levels.
Committee members have noted that labor market developments are in line with the temporary slowdown in production during the third quarter, and expect that employment growth would resume by the end of the year amid the ongoing economic recovery.
In fact, after the third-quarter drop, non-farm employment was back on the rise in September, albeit modestly.
The primary objective of the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) is to achieve and maintain price stability.
At the same time, financial stability is one of the fundamental duties of the CBT.
However, unlike other regulatory and supervisory institutions, the CBT approaches financial stability from a macroeconomic perspective.
From a macro perspective, financial stability risks under the current conditions are most evident as the rapidly increasing current account deficit fueled by short-term capital inflows.
The divergence between domestic and foreign demand growth coupled with a rapid credit expansion is increasing the current account deficit, thereby raising financial stability concerns.
Moreover, the recent developments and related policy decisions in the European and US economies have been exacerbating these risks, necessitating a revision in the domestic policy mix.
The contribution of credit expansion to the current account deficit deserves particular attention in an environment of weak external demand.
Therefore, the Committee members have underscored that one of the goals of the current policy mix should be reducing the pace of credit growth.
To this end, it was stated that reserve requirement ratios should be used as an active monetary policy tool.
At the same time, the rapid pace of credit expansion also brings attention to the maturity mismatches between the assets and liabilities of the banking system.
Accordingly, gearing the policy mix towards extending the maturities of the banking system liabilities would also help with regard to macroprudential risks.
In this respect, the Committee has suggested that it would be useful to differentiate reserve requirement ratios for different TL deposit maturities in order to encourage longer-term funding, to raise reserve requirement ratios especially for short-term liabilities, and to widen the scope of reserve requirements.
Another issue which should be taken account while formulating current policy mix is fostering the maturity extension of capital inflows.
This is important for improving the quality of the capital account and avoiding exchange rate movements detached from economic fundamentals.
Against this backdrop, the Committee has come to the conclusion that it would be an appropriate policy mix to lower the policy rate and to widen the corridor between overnight borrowing and lending rates so as to allow fluctuations in the short-term interest rates, when needed.
The Committee underscored that price stability should be the overriding concern while designing the policy measures against the current account deficit.
Although inflation is expected to be close to the end-2010 target, the Committee members have highlighted that the sharp increases in agricultural commodity prices such as cotton and wheat pose risks for the inflation outlook.
The existing output gap has been limiting the pass-through from agricultural commodity prices to the prices of core goods and services.
However, the Committee, highlighting the rapid pace of domestic demand, has stated that the impact of commodity prices on general price setting behavior should be closely monitored.
Accordingly, the Committee members have agreed that the net impact of the macroprudential policy package implemented—and to be implemented—both by the CBT and other institutions should be on the tightening side.
In light of these assessments, as an outcome of the meeting, the Committee has stated that a lower policy rate, a wider interest rate corridor, combined with higher required reserve ratios would serve as a more effective policy mix, both for price stability and financial stability.
The Committee assessed that the net impact of these measures on the monetary conditions would not be expansionary.
In particular, higher effective required reserve ratios are anticipated to curb the credit growth through the cost and liquidity channels starting from January 2011.
The effects of today’s decisions on both price and financial stability will be monitored closely and additional measures will be implemented if necessary.
The composition and the direction of the policy instruments in the forthcoming period may vary depending on the factors affecting price stability and financial stability.
The policies implemented by the CBT should be assessed as an entire package.
The monetary policy stance is not only determined by the level of the policy rates, but as a mixture of all the policy instruments mentioned above.
Therefore, the net impact of the combination of the policy measures should be taken into account while assessing the inflation outlook.
The measures implemented by the CBT are necessary but not alone sufficient to safeguard financial stability under current conditions.
Coordination across all institutions responsible for regulation, supervision and counterbalancing is therefore crucial.
The support of other institutions especially regarding the tightening of credit supply and encouraging maturity extensions would increase the flexibility and effectiveness of monetary policy.
Increasing government savings—and therefore maintaining fiscal discipline—- is also essential for containing the risks regarding current account deficit.
Controlling the budget expenditures during 2010 as envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP) is a major step towards this direction.
Maintaining the fiscal discipline in the period ahead would enhance the impact of the measures taken for both price and financial stability.
To this end, the impact of the measures taken by the CBT and other institutions on the inflation outlook will be considered carefully.
In December, consumer prices decreased by 0.30 percent, and annual inflation fell to 6.40 percent.
Thus, the annual inflation rate was quite close to the end-2010 target of 6.5 percent.
Unprocessed food prices continued to fall, while the inflation in services and core goods rose slightly, yet remained in line with medium-term targets.
Headline inflation would continue to decelerate in coming months, mainly due to base effects, whereas the annual rate of increase in core indicators is expected to increase, albeit modestly.
Unprocessed food prices continued to fall with a December outturn of 5.79 percent.
Prices of fresh fruits and vegetables as well as red meat decreased.
As stated in the October Inflation Report, fruit and vegetable production forecasts for 2010 suggested that fruit and vegetable prices were rising only temporarily and would see a correction in the final quarter.
Indeed, increases in fruit and vegetable prices were followed by larger-than-expected decreases during the fourth quarter, bringing the annual unprocessed food inflation down from 31.28 percent in October to 8.52 percent at year-end.
Regarding processed food, processed meat prices declined while prices of bread and cereals and solid and liquid fats increased on rising international food prices.
Thus, after soaring at an unprecedented rate amid higher unprocessed food prices during the third quarter, the annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages slowed to 7.02 percent, bringing the group's contribution to annual inflation down to 1.94 percentage points at year-end from as high as 4.67 percentage points over 2010.
Energy prices rose by 2.73 percent in December amid higher fuel and bottled gas prices driven by rising international oil prices and exchange rate developments.
Moreover, water tariffs went up in a number of cities.
Therefore, after slowing in the second half of 2010, the annual energy inflation increased to 9.96 percent in December.
The services inflation rate registered an all-time year-end low of 4.24 percent.
Although services inflation rose slightly in December due to higher communication prices, inflation was down in rents, hotels, restaurants and transport services.
The annual inflation in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) rose to 1.70 percent owing to December's lower-than-average seasonal discounts on clothing and footwear.
Overall, the annual rate of increase in core inflation indicators was slightly faster in December but remained in line with medium-term targets.
Recent releases have been consistent with the outlook presented in the October Inflation Report.
Despite falling month-on-month in November, industrial production was significantly higher than the third-quarter average during October-November owing to sharp increases in October.
Leading indicators suggest that November's production loss would be offset in December.
In fact, the fourth-quarter capacity utilization rates and expectations for new orders point to a faster production growth than in the third quarter.
The production and imports of consumer goods were higher during October- November than the third-quarter average.
The fourth-quarter improvement in survey indicators, sales data and consumer confidence points to an ongoing recovery in private consumption demand.
Yet, the Committee expects the recent policy measures to restrain the pace of recovery in loans and domestic demand over the upcoming period.
The production and imports of investment goods, particularly those related to motor vehicles, increased significantly during October-November compared to the third-quarter average.
Indicators for the last quarter suggest that private investments would accelerate quarter-on-quarter and continue to rise sharply year-on-year.
The Committee expects the robust growth in investments to continue into coming months amid supportive monetary conditions and reduced demand uncertainty.
Indeed, both the gradual rise in capacity utilization rates and the manufacturing industry investments recently hitting a four-year high support this observation.
However, Committee members have noted that foreign demand uncertainties would continue to slow the pace of recovery in investments, particularly in the manufacturing industry.
Uncertainties remain about foreign demand.
Although the export quantity index excluding gold increased quarter-on-quarter during October-November after declining in the third quarter, leading indicators for exports and new orders show no sign of a strong recovery in the short term.
In fact, exports have grown at quite a weaker and more volatile pace than domestic demand during the recovery.
Having noted that industrial capacity utilization rates remain below their pre-crisis levels due to weak foreign demand, the Committee expects this slowdown to continue for a while in view of the prospects of a weak global economic recovery.
Non-farm employment increased during September- November in seasonally adjusted terms.
Leading indicators point to an acceleration in December's non-farm employment growth, confirming the Committee's expectation that the third-quarter pause was temporary and employment growth would resume by the end of the year.
Against this backdrop, the Committee has stated that aggregate demand conditions do not exert upside pressures on inflation.
According to the Committee members, the impact of the measures taken in December to contain credit supply will be seen in the forthcoming days.
It was indicated that additional restrictive measures on credit expansion, to be taken until the next meeting, would provide more room for monetary policy.
In this respect, the Committee stated that additional hikes in required reserve ratios for short term liabilities would be necessary.
Since the launch of inflation targeting in 2006, the Committee has announced its medium-term inflation forecasts and provided a qualitative perspective regarding the outlook for policy rates.
The current economic climate requires the monetary policy to consider financial stability along with financial stability, requiring the Committee to utilize a broader set of monetary policy instruments including policy rates, reserve requirement ratios, and liquidity management facilities.
Therefore, the Committee has indicated that lower policy rate coupled with higher reserve requirement ratios is the optimal policy mix under current conditions, in terms of upholding both financial stability and price stability.
In this respect, it was decided that the policy rate would be reduced by 25 basis points.
Given the mounting uncertainties concerning the global economic outlook, flexibility regarding each instrument within the policy mix would be needed.
Therefore, the Committee agreed that the Inflation Report will provide forecasts for the net effect of the policy mix rather than the direction of each policy instrument, and will not outline an explicit path regarding the individual elements of the policy mix.
The Committee evaluated the forecasts to be presented in the January Inflation Report.
Inflation is expected to decline significantly in January and remain below the end-year target of 5.5 percent in the first quarter, before displaying a volatile path starting with the second quarter.
Assuming that a limited monetary tightening brings credit growth rate down to 20-25 percent in 2011, the revised forecasts indicate that inflation would be close to the target by the end of 2011.
The Committee noted that the envisaged monetary tightening in 2011 may be executed through various combinations of different policy tools.
It was underscored that the monetary tightening could be implemented by either required reserve ratios or policy rates, or a combination of both.
Moreover, it was stated that during the tightening process, both instruments could move in either the same or in opposite directions.
On the other hand, the Committee also emphasized that the net impact of the measures taken—and to be taken in the future—within the new policy framework, will be restrictive.
The baseline scenario of the January Inflation Report envisages a gradual tightening by changing the mix of the policy rate and reserve requirement ratios.
Such a tightening should not only aim at slowing down credit growth and domestic demand, but also reduce macroprudential concerns.
The impact of the monetary tightening on the credit growth is expected to be apparent over the near term.
However, the time lag and the extent of the impact of the policy measures may vary depending on the developments beyond the control of monetary policy.
Therefore, the Committee will closely monitor the effects of the policy measures and take further actions should the credit growth rate or the inflation rate deviate from the desired levels.
Developments regarding the global economy remain central for the domestic inflation and monetary policy outlook.
Under current conditions, the Committee is utilizing several instruments in order to preserve both price stability and financial stability.
Therefore, global developments would not only affect the direction of the policy instruments, but also their mix.
Accordingly, global developments will be assessed against their effects on the aggregate demand as well as its composition.
Although there has been some improvement regarding the expectations on the US economy, uncertainties driven by debt sustainability problems across euro area peripheral economies still persist.
Ongoing problems in credit, real estate, and labor markets across developed economies and the uncertainties regarding the impact of fiscal consolidations continue to pose downside risks regarding the pace of global growth.
The possibility of a longer-than- anticipated period of anemic global growth and a long period of quantitative easing by developed economies not only creates downside risks regarding external demand but also suggests that capital inflows may continue at a faster pace.
Should such a scenario materialize, a policy mix of low policy rate and high reserve requirement ratios may be implemented for a long period, both for balancing the domestic and external demand and for macroprudential purposes.
Moreover, an outcome whereby global economic problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity may require an easing in all policy instruments.
Although downside risks are important, there are also upside risks regarding global economy, particularly driven by the lagged impacts of the exceptionally loose monetary policies implemented by the developed economies during the past two years.
If the global economy faces a faster-than-expected recovery, global inflation may increase and thus trigger a tightening in the monetary policies of developed economies.
Materialization of such a scenario would mean higher global interest rates and demand-driven domestic inflation, and thus necessitate a tightening by using both policy rates and reserve requirements.
Oil and other commodity prices have displayed rapid increases in the recent period.
The increases in commodity prices, if they persist, exert risks regarding general pricing behavior, given the strong pace of domestic demand.
Should such a risk materialize and hamper the attainment of the medium-term inflation targets, there may be stronger tightening than envisaged in the baseline scenario.
However, the policy mix may vary depending on the developments regarding external demand, capital flows, and the outlook for credit growth.
The Committee continues to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
Increasing government saving under current circumstances is essential to control the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and external demand.
Our inflation forecasts take the fiscal projections of the Medium Term Program (MTP) as given.
A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on inflation outlook.
To this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on the inflation outlook will be considered carefully.
Sustaining the fiscal discipline will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and support the social welfare by keeping interest rates permanently at low levels.
In January, consumer prices were up 0.4 percent, and annual inflation fell by 1.5 percentage points to 4.9 percent mainly on the back of base effects.
As anticipated in the summary of the January .
Committee (the Committee) meeting, core inflation indicators increased slightly in January.
Unprocessed food prices increased by 2.08 percent month-on-month, while unprocessed food inflation eased to 8.05 percent year-on-year.
Meanwhile, processed food prices continued to accelerate on soaring prices for bread and cereals as well as oils and fats.
Annual processed food inflation is expected to increase gradually in coming months amid higher international food prices.
However, annual food inflation is expected to drop markedly in February due to base effects from unprocessed food prices.
Energy prices rose by 1.04 percent amid increased fuel prices, driven by soaring international oil prices, and higher water supply tariffs, while annual energy inflation fell 3 percentage points on base effects.
Services inflation edged slightly upwards in February.
The annual inflation picked up in communication services, slowed in transport services, hotels and restaurants, and remained flat in rents.
The recent increases in processed food and fuel prices exert cost pressure on prices of services.
The annual inflation in core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) rose to 2 percent owing to January's lower-than- average seasonal discounts on clothing and footwear.
Moreover, there has been some pass-through to core prices in January from rising import prices and the depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Higher prices of services and core goods put upward pressure on core inflation indicators.
Moreover, in line with expectations, seasonally adjusted core inflation has also trended up.
Recent releases on economic activity have been consistent with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report.
Latest data for the fourth quarter confirm the Committee's expectation that the third-quarter slowdown in economic activity would be temporary.
Indeed, the industrial production index rose sharply in December both on a monthly and quarterly basis.
Yet, the Committee has noted that manufacturing new orders show signs of deceleration over the first quarter, largely due to domestic demand.
Economic activity continues to recover amid increasing domestic demand.
The production and imports of consumer and investment goods were higher in the fourth quarter than the third-quarter average, pointing to an acceleration in domestic demand, particularly for imported goods.
However, the improvement in consumer confidence and investor sentiment has recently paused, while consumer loans have been slowing amid sluggish auto loans.
Against this background, the Committee has reiterated that the recent measures would restrain the rate of increase in loans and domestic demand over the upcoming period.
Foreign demand remains relatively weak despite the recent pick-up.
Although the export quantity index excluding gold increased quarter-on-quarter during the fourth quarter after declining in the third quarter, indicators for new orders show no sign of a strong recovery in exports.
Meanwhile, the seasonally adjusted imports excluding energy declined slightly in December.
The Committee expects import demand to slow further and demand components to follow a more balanced path in coming months.
Employment conditions continue to improve, yet, unemployment rates remain at high levels.
Employment developments were consistent with the Committee's expectation that the third-quarter pause in the non-farm employment growth would be temporary and employment growth would resume by the end of the year.
Indeed, employment in industry increased significantly amid strong activity.
Leading indicators suggest that non-farm employment would continue to grow in coming months.
The Committee expects inflation to further decline in February, display some fluctuations starting with the second quarter, and end the year at a level close to the January Inflation Report forecast.
Especially, the base effects stemming from the unprocessed food fluctuations during the previous year would continue to be important for the path of annual inflation.
Moreover, the cost- push effects driven by the import prices may lead to an increase in core inflation indicators.
On the other hand, the Committee members indicated that the high level of unemployment rates compared to the pre-crisis levels would contain unit labor costs.
The measures taken by the Central Bank since November are reducing macro-financial risks by leading to a more balanced growth path, mainly through a slowdown in import growth.
The Committee indicated that, in annualized terms, current account deficit would continue to widen, albeit at a decelerating pace, in the first quarter owing to the base effect.
Therefore, it is important to monitor seasonally adjusted monthly figures in order to assess the impact of the monetary measures.
In fact, in seasonally adjusted terms, there was some improvement in the current account deficit in December, and also a slight deceleration in the pace of credit growth was observed at the beginning of 2011.
However, the Committee members have also underscored that available data is not long enough to make a healthy assessment, as the effects of the measures would be observed with some lag.
The Committee has indicated that the monetary tightening would restrain the demand side pressures on inflation.
In fact, leading indicators suggest that domestic orders have moderated during the first quarter compared to the previous quarter.
However, the Committee has also noted that rising energy and other commodity prices would pose supply side risks on the inflation outlook.
Therefore, it was underscored that the pricing behavior should be monitored closely.
In light of these assessments, in order to contain the risks towards price stability and financial stability, the Committee has decided to closely monitor the tightening impact of the implemented policy mix—a low policy rate, a wide interest corridor and high reserve requirement ratios—until the next meeting, and take additional measures along the same line, if needed.
According to the Committee members, uncertainties regarding global economy still persist, requiring monetary policy to be flexible on both sides.
Ongoing problems in credit, real estate, and labor markets across developed economies and the uncertainties regarding the impact of fiscal consolidations continue to pose risks regarding the global economy.
In this respect, the recovery signals coming from the US economy should be interpreted with caution.
Moreover, it was reminded that the financial and sovereign debt related problems in the euro area would persist for a long period.
On the other hand, it was stated that global inflation risks due to rapidly rising commodity prices and lagged impacts of the monetary expansion remain as a major concern.
In sum, the Committee members have underscored that both the upside and downside risk factors and the related policy responses outlined in the Inflation Report are still applicable.
To this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other related institutions on the inflation outlook will be considered carefully.
In February, consumer prices increased by 0.73 percent, while annual inflation fell to 4.16 percent, mainly due to base effects from unprocessed food prices.
The annual rate of increase was up in prices of core goods but slightly down in prices of services.
As anticipated in the Summary of the February .
Committee (the Committee) meeting, the annual rate of increase in core inflation measures continued to rise.
In the unprocessed food group, prices increased by 4.32 percent in February, while inflation dropped to 2.89 percent year-on-year owing to base effects.
In the processed food group, prices continued to accelerate on soaring prices for bread and cereals as well as oils and fats.
Although annual processed food inflation is expected to increase gradually in coming months amid higher international food prices, the temporary lifting of customs duties on wheat imports may help to reduce this upward pressure.
Developments in international oil prices and exchange rates continued to push fuel prices up in February, while annual energy inflation eased to 6.23 percent on base effects.
Annual services inflation edged down to 4.22 percent in February.
Annual inflation was down in restaurants and hotels, reflecting lower food inflation, while accelerating fuel prices put further upward pressure on transport services.
Annual inflation in services excluding catering and transport was as low as 2.34 percent in February, while the annual rate of increase in rents remained stable at 4 percent.
Annual core goods inflation (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) rose by 1.31 percentage points to 3.31 percent on higher import prices and the depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Specifically, the increase in durable goods inflation was significant in February.
Noting the recent run-up in seasonally adjusted core price measures driven by rapid increases in import prices, the Committee expects annual core inflation to continue to rise for a while.
Recent releases on economic activity have been largely consistent with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report.
After increasing sharply in December, seasonally adjusted industrial production decelerated in January, but was still significantly higher than the fourth-quarter average.
Leading indicators for February and March have shown that the pace of economic activity slowed quarter-on-quarter, yet remained strong.
Economic activity continues to strengthen amid increasing domestic demand.
The production and imports of consumer goods were significantly higher in January than the fourth-quarter averages.
The ongoing surge in consumer confidence and credit use does not point to a marked slowdown in the first quarter's private consumption spending.
Similarly, the January rise in the production and imports of capital goods and the robust sales of commercial vehicles during January-February suggest that the rapid recovery in private investments continued in the first quarter.
Imports continue to increase with strong domestic demand.
The Committee has noted that rising oil prices may mask the slowdown in the main trend of imports, and thus non-energy imports would be a more informative variable in assessing the impact of the recent policy measures.
That said, the Committee has reiterated that the restrictive effects of these policy measures on loans and imports would be observed with a lag.
January's export (excluding gold) quantity index was higher than the fourth-quarter average, while leading indicators for February and March confirm the gradual recovery in exports.
The flat course of 3-month-ahead expectations for new orders indicates that foreign demand is unlikely to recover strongly over the short term.
Moreover, both the political tension in North Africa and the massive earthquake in Japan pose downside risks to the foreign demand outlook.
While the recovery in the non-farm employment continues, both recent production data and survey indicators for investment and employment indicate that this trend would be maintained over the coming months.
Nevertheless, the Committee has reiterated that unemployment rates would remain higher than pre-crisis levels for a while, containing the unit labor costs.
In light of these developments, the Committee concluded that aggregate demand conditions are in line with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report.
Both the unemployment and capacity utilization rates suggest that the output gap has not closed.
In fact, unit labor costs and services prices do not display a noticeable acceleration.
However, oil and other commodity prices hover above the Inflation Report assumptions, exerting upward pressure on core goods prices.
Accordingly, the Committee expects that core goods inflation would continue to increase for some time, while services inflation would display a more benign path.
Although the measures taken by the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) since November are expected to have an impact on credit volume and domestic demand starting with the second quarter, some additional increase in reserve requirement is deemed necessary for macroprudential purposes.
The measures aim at containing the macro financial risks by inducing a more balanced composition of the aggregate demand.
Recently, domestic and export orders show a more balanced pattern, suggesting that policy measures have started to become effective to some extent.
However, given the strength of the credit growth and other domestic demand indicators, the Committee indicated that additional monetary tightening would be necessary for containing macro financial risks.
According to the Committee members, implementing the monetary tightening through reserve requirements, rather than using the policy rates, would be more effective under current conditions.
In this respect, the CBT decided to deliver a notable hike in the weighted average of reserve requirements on short term liabilities.
In this respect, the Committee noted that the decision on reserve requirements would also provide the monetary tightening required for containing the potential second round effects of the recent increases in oil and other commodity prices.
The Committee members indicated that this decision reflects the policy reaction implied through the “persistent increases in commodity prices” scenario in the January Inflation Report.
In light of these assessments, in order to contain the risks towards price stability and financial stability, the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the implemented policy mix—a low policy rate, a wide interest corridor and high reserve requirement ratios—and take additional measures along the same lines, if needed.
The Committee members have indicated that reserve requirement is only one of the tools for containing credit growth and domestic demand, and emphasized the importance of the supplementary macroprudential measures by other related institutions.
In this respect, it was stated that the direct measures targeting credit supply would enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the policy implemented by the CBT.
The Committee monitors the fiscal policy developments closely.
Budget figures regarding the first two months of the year suggest that revenues are increasing at a faster pace than envisaged in the Medium Term Program (MTP), owing to the stronger-than-expected economic activity.
The Committee underscored that saving this fiscal space would not only help to balance the domestic and external demand, but also reduce the need for the CBT to take additional measures.
In March, consumer prices increased by 0.42 percent, while annual inflation fell to 3.99 percent.
As anticipated in the Summary of .
Committee (the Committee) meeting, annual inflation continued to rise in core goods.
However, service inflation went down on base effects.
Thus, the annual rate of increase in core inflation indicators remained flat month-on-month.
Annual unprocessed food inflation declined to 0.56 percent.
Processed food prices continued to trend upward in March.
As stated in the summary of the March meeting, the temporary lifting of customs duties on wheat imports helped restrain the monthly price hike in bread and cereals, but rising prices of fats and oils brought annual processed food inflation up to 6.39 percent.
As a result, annual food inflation ended the first quarter at 3.47 percent.
The Committee has noted that annual unprocessed food inflation is likely to increase in the second quarter due to base effects.
Rising international oil prices and exchange rate developments continued to put upward pressure on fuel prices in March.
Thus, annual energy inflation rose to 7.02 percent.
Other energy items are also expected to reflect the cumulative increases in oil prices over the upcoming period.
Prices of services increased by 0.40 percent, while annual services inflation dropped to an all-time low of 3.57 percent.
The annual rate of increase in restaurants and hotels decreased amid favorable food prices, whereas transport prices continued to rise due to higher fuel prices.
Meanwhile, the base effects from communication services may lead to a significant increase in April's annual services inflation.
Annual core goods inflation (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) continued to rise.
The annual rate of increase in clothing prices was slightly up, whereas the annual inflation in other core goods, primarily durable goods, increased rapidly due to rising import prices and the ongoing effects of the depreciating Turkish lira.
The raised customs duties on fabric and apparel imports are expected to affect prices of core goods in the second half of 2011.
Overall, inflation is expected to increase in the short term due to the lagged effects of rising oil prices and base effects and remain volatile throughout the year.
Recent releases suggest that the economic activity is moderating after a strong print in the last quarter of 2010.
Indeed, industrial production, capacity utilization and other leading data indicate a slowdown on a quarterly basis.
In addition, expectations for the 3-month ahead orders signal that economic activity would continue to grow moderately in the second quarter.
Domestic demand remains strong.
The production and imports of consumption and investment goods were higher during January-February than the fourth- quarter averages.
Moreover, the investment sentiment for the next 12 months has stabilized at high levels.
In light of these data, the Committee has stated that domestic demand remained strong over the first quarter.
The Committee has indicated that rising oil prices may mask the slowdown in imports, and thus non-energy imports would be a more informative indicator in assessing the impact of the recent policy measures.
In this context, the Committee has noted that there was no significant slowdown in the first-quarter’s non-energy imports, and reiterated that the restrictive effects of the policy measures on loans and imports would be observed with a lag.
External demand displays a weaker pace.
The January-February export (excluding gold) quantity index was moderately higher than the fourth-quarter average, while the flat course of the expectations on the 3-month-ahead orders indicates that external demand conditions are unlikely to recover strongly over the short term.
The fact that euro area (Turkey's largest trading partner) output is still below pre-crisis levels suggests a similar outlook.
Highlighting the ongoing fragility across advanced economies, the Committee has reiterated that the exports would recover slowly and gradually.
Employment conditions continue to improve, though, unemployment rates remain higher than pre-crisis levels.
While the recovery in non-farm employment continues, leading indicators for investment and employment show that this trend would be maintained over the coming months.
Nevertheless, the Committee has maintained the view that unemployment rates would remain higher than pre-crisis levels for a while, containing the unit labor costs.
The Committee has assessed the forecasts prepared for the Inflation Report.
The data for the first quarter of 2011 indicate that the economic activity, driven by the domestic demand, is more robust than expected.
Accordingly, the Committee members have indicated that the revised forecasts would be based on the assumption that aggregate demand conditions provide less support for disinflation compared to the previous period.
On the other hand, it was stated that capacity utilization rates are still below pre-crisis levels and unemployment rates are above pre-crisis levels, and thus the output gap is not closed as of the first quarter of 2011.
However, owing to the lagged impact of rising oil prices as well as base effects, inflation is expected to display an increasing trend over the short term and, after hovering around the target throughout the year, it is expected to end the year somewhat above the target of 5.5 percent.
The Committee has indicated that the above-target forecast for end-2011 inflation can be completely attributed to developments beyond the control of monetary policy.
Accordingly, it was stated that Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will not react to the first round effects of the increases in oil and other commodity prices.
However, it was underscored that second round effects will be closely monitored and a deterioration in the pricing behavior will not be tolerated.
The effects of the measures taken by the CBT since November on credit volume and domestic demand are expected to be more visible starting with the second quarter.
However, the Committee has indicated that raising reserve requirements on short term foreign exchange and Turkish lira liabilities would contribute to containing macro financial risks by rebalancing the external and domestic demand.
In assessing risk factors and related monetary policy measures, current framework takes both price stability and financial stability into account.
Therefore, risk factors are not only assessed with respect to their impact on the level but also on the composition (external versus domestic demand) of the aggregate demand.
The level of the aggregate demand is related to price stability, while its composition refers directly to financial stability.
Risk factors regarding global economy are also evaluated against this backdrop.
Although downside risks regarding global economy have decreased compared to the previous quarter, they are still significant.
Problems in credit, real estate and labor markets in many advanced economies are yet to be solved.
Moreover, uncertainties regarding debt sustainability issues and the impact of fiscal consolidations persist.
On the other hand, rapid increases in oil prices may restrain the global recovery.
All these factors continue to pose downside risks regarding the pace of global growth.
The possibility of a longer-than- anticipated period of slow global growth not only creates downside risks regarding external demand, but also suggests that short term capital inflows may remain strong.
Should such a scenario materialize, a policy mix of low policy rate, high reserve requirement ratios and wide interest rate corridor may be implemented for a long period.
Moreover, an outcome whereby global economic problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity, may require an easing in all policy instruments.
Although downside risks remain notable, upside risks regarding global economy are becoming more significant, particularly driven by the lagged impacts of the exceptionally loose monetary policies implemented by the developed economies.
If the global economy faces a faster-than-expected recovery, global inflationary pressures may arise sooner than envisaged.
Materialization of such a scenario would mean higher policy rates at a global scale and demand-driven domestic inflation, and thus necessitates a tightening by using both policy rates and reserve requirements.
The outlook for oil and other commodity prices remains uncertain.
Should the increases in commodity prices persist and exert risks regarding the general pricing behavior, the additional tightening may be implemented sooner than implied by the baseline scenario presented in the Inflation Report.
However, given that higher oil prices will also worsen the current account balance, a possible policy response will consider macro-financial risks as well.
Therefore, the exact content of the policy mix may vary depending on the outlook for external demand, capital flows, and the credit growth.
Our inflation forecasts in the baseline scenario of the Inflation Report assume that the ratio of fiscal expenditures to the GDP will evolve as projected in the Medium Term Program (MTP).
A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on medium-term inflation outlook.
Increasing government saving—thus sustaining fiscal discipline—under current circumstances is essential to control the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and external demand.
Therefore saving the extra tax revenues driven by the stronger than expected economic activity would not only reduce financial stability risks, but also increase the efficiency of the new policy mix.
To this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the CBT and other institutions on the inflation outlook will be assessed carefully.
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would support the improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability.
In April, consumer prices increased by 0.87 percent, and annual inflation rose to 4.26 percent.
This increase in annual inflation reflects the lagged effects of import prices and the base effect from communication services.
Therefore, core inflation indicators remained on the rise as expected.
Unprocessed food prices continued to support disinflation in April.
Annual unprocessed food inflation fell to -0.83 percent in April from as high as 31.28 percent in October 2010.
Meanwhile, annual processed food inflation remained flat.
Thus, annual food inflation continued to fall in April, hitting an all-time low of 2.83 percent.
However, rising fruit prices and base effects may put significant upward pressure on May's food inflation.
Energy prices continued to rise amid high international oil prices, bringing annual energy inflation up to 7.79 percent.
Cumulative increases in oil prices are expected to pass-through other energy items over the second half of this year.
Services inflation remained moderate in April.
Yet, as stated in the monthly price bulletin for March, annual services inflation increased due to base effects from communication services.
Transport prices continued to rise slightly amid higher fuel prices, while the annual rate of increase in restaurants and hotels declined further, by a total of 2.5 percentage points in the first four months.
Thus, services inflation continued to slow in seasonally adjusted terms.
Annual core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) inflation continues to surge on rising prices of imported goods.
Among durable goods, prices of white goods increased at a slower rate, whereas furniture and automobile prices rose sharply.
Recent data releases on economic activity are consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report.
Despite slowing quarter-on-quarter, industrial production remained robust in the first quarter of 2011.
Recent capacity and production indicators also point to a slowdown in second-quarter economic activity.
Private consumption and investment growth rates are moderating after a strong rebound in 2010.
Production and imports data for consumption and investment goods confirm the first quarter's strong domestic demand.
However, leading indicators for the second quarter such as domestic sales of automobiles, commercial vehicles and white goods as well as consumption indices are down quarter-on-quarter.
Moreover, expectations for domestic orders also signal a slowdown in domestic demand.
External demand outlook remains weak.
While the first quarter's non-gold export quantity index was slightly lower than the fourth-quarter average, leading indicators point to a moderate recovery in exports for the second quarter.
Consideringthe recently mounting uncertainty about the global economy, the Committee has emphasized that downside risks to external demand remain.
In this regard, the Committee has reiterated that exports would recover slowly and gradually.
Employment conditions continue to improve and unemployment rates are approaching the pre-crisis levels.
Employment grew at a stronger-than- expected pace in the first quarter.
Leading indicators suggest that this uptrend would continue in the short term, albeit at a slower rate.
The Committee has stated that the improved employment conditions support domestic demand, but have yet to exert upward pressure on unit labor costs.
The Committee members drew attention to capacity utilization rates in the manufacturing industry which have remained at low levels and stated that total demand outlook has not reached levels to put upward pressure on inflation.
Benign course of services inflation supports the case against overheating.
However, owing to the lagged impact of cumulative rising import prices, moderate increase in core inflation is expected to continue over the short term.
The Committee members reiterated that last year’s sharp fluctuations in food prices will lead to a volatility in headline inflation in the period ahead.
In this respect, the Committee noted that inflation may exceed the year-end target of 5.5 percent in May due to base effects arising from unprocessed food prices, and follow a volatile course thereafter in line with the path presented in the Inflation Report.
The effects of the tightening measures on credit growth and domestic demand have become visible in the second quarter.
Recent data suggest that the pace of credit growth has been moderating.
Moreover, non-energy imports, which displayed a strong print in the first quarter, are expected to follow a more benign path starting with the second quarter.
Moreover, orders and sales data along with confidence indicators also signal some slowdown in domestic demand growth.
Despite the slowdown in domestic demand growth, developments in external demand and energy prices since the beginning of the year have been postponing the improvement in the current account.
Political uncertainties in the North Africa have not only led to higher import bill through elevated energy prices,but also restrained the recovery in exports.
Moreover, heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability in some euro area countries have increased the downside risks for the European economy—our major trading partner.
Overall, the Committee indicated that both elevated levels of energy and other commodity prices and a weaker external demand outlook postpone the improvement in the current account balance to the last quarter.
In light of these assessments, considering the uncertainty regarding the global economy, the Committee has indicated that it would be useful to continue to observe the lagged impacts of the measures taken so far.
According to the Committee members, it would be appropriate to remain flexible regarding the exact content of the policy mix, given the high level of uncertainty arising from the global economic conditions.
In this respect, it was stated that the risk scenarios outlined in the Inflation Report continue to be relevant.
Therefore, in order to contain the risks towards price stability and financial stability, the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the existing policy mix and take additional measures along the same lines, if needed.
The meeting also included an evaluation of the course of capital inflows and foreign exchange purchase auctions.
The Committee members highlighted the relative weakness in capital flows to emerging markets due to heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in some euroarea countries, and stated that it might be useful to revise the amount purchased via daily auctions.
It was indicated that the auction amount could be reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist, which, in turn, could ease the need for further hikes in reserve requirements by reducing the liquidity injected to the market through foreign exchange purchases.
Similarly, measures to be taken in the forthcoming period by other institutions in collaboration with the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) would also reduce the need for additional hikes in reserve requirement ratios.
Therefore saving the extra tax revenues driven by the stronger-than- expected economic activity would not only reduce financial stability risks, but also increase the efficiency of the new policy mix.
Monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability while preserving financial stability as a supplementary objective.
In May, consumer prices were up 2.42 percent, while annual inflation rose by about 3 percentage points to 7.17 percent.
This increase was largely driven by the spike in fresh fruit prices due to seasonal variations.
On the other hand, the annual rate of increase in core inflation indicators edged up slightly month- on-month as expected.
The summary of the May meeting stated that soaring fruit prices could put significant upward pressure on unprocessed food inflation.
Indeed, the fruit price index rose by a stronger-than-expected 76.12 percent month-on-month, as some goods entered May's index at very high prices due to supply side developments.
The Committee has noted that this jump in unprocessed food inflation would largely reverse in June and annual inflation would fall back to the forecasted path in the Inflation Report.
Annual services inflation increased slightly to 4.44 percent due to base effects.
Developments across subcategories do not suggest any upward pressure on services inflation.
In fact, recent seasonally adjusted figures indicate that services inflation maintains its moderate pace.
Annual core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) inflation continues to rise.
Seasonal increases in clothing prices were higher than the previous year, whereas, among durable goods, furniture and automobile prices decelerated and prices of white goods fell, reversing the upsurge in previous months.
Although core inflation indicators increased in annual terms in May due to developments in services and core goods, their underlying trend implied by the seasonally adjusted figures appears to have slowed.
Recent data releases are consistent with the outlook presented in the Inflation Report.
After a robust first quarter fueled by strong domestic demand, economic activity slowed in the second quarter.
Indeed, industrial production dropped month-on-month for three consecutive months during February-April, dipping below the first quarter's average in April.
The Committee has noted that the slowdown in sectors sensitive to external demand has been more pronounced.
Private consumption and investment growth rates are moderating.
The strong growth in private demand decelerated in the second quarter.
April's production and imports of consumer goods and production of capital goods were down from the first quarter.
April-May sales data also confirm the slowdown in private demand.
Recent data point to a limited recovery in exports for the second quarter.
The flat course of 3-month ahead expectations for new orders signals that external demand conditions are unlikely to improve significantly over the short term.
Considering the mounting uncertainty about the global economy, the Committee has emphasized that downside risks to external demand have increased.
Employment conditions continue to improve, with unemployment rates having returned to pre-crisis levels.
The first quarter's faster-than-expected employment growth continued into March, albeit at a slower rate.
Leading indicators suggest that this uptrend would continue at a slower pace in the short term.
The Committee has stated that improved employment conditions support domestic demand, yet unit labor costs decline due to strong productivity gains.
The Committee reiterated its view that aggregate demand conditions do not indicate an overheating.
Recently, domestic demand moderates while low levels of capacity utilization rates persist due to weak external demand.
Orders and sales data as well as confidence indices confirm the slowdown in the pace of domestic demand growth during the second quarter.
Given the lagged impact of rising import prices and base effects, core inflation is expected to increase at a moderate pace over the short term.
The Committee members have underscored that this increase reflects a relative price adjustment of tradable goods rather than a deterioration in the overall pricing behavior; and thus, second round effects are not observed yet.
The recent measures taken by the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency towards consumer loans will contribute to the rebalancing of domestic and external demand through controlling the fast credit growth.
These measures also reduce the need for additional hikes in reserve requirement ratios.
The Committee has reiterated that, owing to the measures taken since last November, the current account balance will start to improve in the final quarter of the year.
Although fragilities in the global economy are of particular concern, the main risk scenarios outlined in the Inflation Report continue to be relevant.
In light of these assessments, combined with the considerations about the ongoing uncertainty regarding the global economy and the slowdown in domestic economic activity, the Committee has decided to maintain the current policy stance.
In order to contain the risks towards price stability and financial stability, the Committee has decided to monitor the tightening impact of the existing policy mix and take additional measures along the same lines, if needed.
The Committee members highlighted the persistence of relative weakness in capital flows towards emerging markets that is due to heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in some euro area countries, and stated that, depending on circumstances, it might be useful to further revise the amount of foreign exchange purchases via daily auctions.
It was reminded that the auction amount could continue to be reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist.
The Committee reiterated that, such a development would lower the liquidity injected into the market and thus ease the need for further hikes in reserve requirements to curb credit growth in the second half of 2011.
The CBT will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating the monetary policy.
Therefore saving the extra tax revenues driven by the stronger-than-expected economic activity would not only reduce the risks against price stability and financial stability, but also increase the efficiency of the implemented policy mix.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program and the European Union acquis communautaire remains to be of utmost importance.
In June, consumer prices decreased by 1.43 percent, and annual inflation went down to 6.24 percent.
As foreseen in the summary of the June .
Committee (the Committee) meeting, this decline was largely driven by the developments in unprocessed food prices due to correction in fresh fruit prices.
Hence, annual inflationreverted back to theprojected path in the April Inflation Report.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages decreased by 6.40 percent following the downward correction in theunprocessed food price index, and the group’s annual inflation went down by 4.48 percentage points to 8.13 percent.
On the processed food front, prices of fats and oilscontinued to rise in June, while ongoing decreases in meat and dairy prices contained the increases in processed food prices.
Prices of services rose by 0.76 percent in June, while annual services inflation increased by 0.58 percentage points to 5.02 percent.
This rise in annual inflation was driven by prices of tour packages.Due to lagged effects of rising fuelprices,the rate of increase in transport prices gained a slight momentum.
Rentscontinued to rise moderately.
On the other hand, seasonally adjusted figures indicate that prices ofservices posted a slower quarter-on-quarter increase in the second quarter.
Annual core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) inflation continued to risedue to cumulative increases in import prices,to 5.56 percent in June.Among durable goods (excluding gold), automobile and furniture prices surged, whereas prices of white goods fell.
The rate of increase in clothing prices continued to rise year-on-year.However, seasonally adjusted data indicate a deceleration in the core goods inflation.
While core inflationindicators increased in June owing to the developments in prices of services and core goods, theirunderlying trend followed a downward path.
TheCommittee anticipates that core inflation is likely to display some upward movement over the short term, but the increase is expected to be limited due to the slowdown in economic activity.
Recent data releases are broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
Second-quarter data indicate a pronounced slowdown in economic activity.
In fact, seasonally adjusted industrial production was down for four consecutive months since February,and materialized below the first- quarter average in the April-May period.
Similarly, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate, which has been declining since the turn of the year, remained flat in June, pointing thatrecently economic activityremains weak.
Private consumption shows signs of slowdown, while investment growth is moderating.
Production and imports of consumption goods remained below first-quarterfigures in the April-May period.Indicators on investment demand suggest a deceleration as well.
Meanwhile, the sales data also confirm the slowdown in domestic demand.
Recent data indicate a limited recovery in exports for the second quarter.
Both global PMI indices and recent figures for new orders suggest that external demand conditions would remain weak in the third quarter.
In fact, low levels of capacity utilization rates persist due to weak external demand.
Considering the mounting uncertainty regarding the global economy, the Committee has reiterated that exports would recover slowly and gradually.
Employment conditions continue to improve, with unemployment rates back to pre-crisis levels.After the first quarter’s faster-than-expected growth, non-farm employment continued to risein April.
Leading indicators suggest that thisuptrend in non-farm employment would continue at a slower pace in the short term.
The Committee has stated that,despiteimproved employment conditions, unit labor costs decreased due to strong productivity gains.
The Committee has indicated that, due to the measures taken so far, the domestic demand is now under control and reiterated that the current account balance will start to improve in the final quarter of the year.
It was stated that the recent measures taken by the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency and the tight fiscal policy stance support the policy mix implemented by the Central Bank, and thus contribute to the rebalancing of domestic and external demand.
Although the rate of credit growth has yet to decline to the levels compatible with the financial stability, the Committee members expect further deceleration in the second half of the year owing to the lagged impact of tightening policies.
In light of these assessments, combined with the heightened uncertainty regarding the global economy and the slowdown in domestic economic activity, the Committee has decided to maintain the current policy mix.
The Committee has also assessed the forecasts prepared for the July Inflation Report.
It was concluded that inflation forecast path would remain largely unchanged, since there has been no significant revision in the underlying assumptions compared to the April Inflation Report.
Nevertheless, the Committee members underscored that developments since the April Inflation Report have increased the downside risks regarding the global economy; and therefore, this view should be emphasized in the Inflation Report and other communication documents regarding monetary policy.
Problems in credit, real estate and labor markets in advanced economies are yet to be solved.
Moreover, concerns on fiscal dynamics in these economies still persist.
Especially, mounting problems regarding sovereign debt of the euro area peripheral economies have increased the downside risks on the global economy.
The Committee members indicated that it would be appropriate to narrow the interest corridor gradually should the sovereign debt problems regarding some European economies and the concerns on global growth continue to have adverse impact on the risk appetite.
Moreover, the Committee stated that all policy instruments may be eased, should global economic problems intensify and lead to a contraction in domestic economic activity.
Even if the debt problems in the euro area are resolved before they turn into a global crisis, it is still likely to experience an extended period of weak economic activity in advanced economies coupled with continued growth in emerging markets driven by domestic demand.
In such a case, there may be a resurge in short term speculative capital inflow to emerging markets.
This would also mean weak external demand and elevated commodity prices, feeding into macro-financial risks for the domestic economy, fueled by the rising capital inflows.
The Committee stated that, should this scenario materialize, low policy rates and high reserve requirements may be preserved for an extended period to contain the risks against price and financial stability.
Developments in exchange rates and import prices have been putting pressure on core inflation since the last quarter of 2010.
The hike in customs duties on fabric and apparel imports is another factor that could lift up the core inflation indicators.
Under current circumstances the increase in core inflation reflects relative price movements, as the existing output gap contains the second round effects of relative price movements.
However, the core inflation is expected to further increase in the forthcoming period, posing upside risks regarding inflation expectations and price setting behavior.
The Committee will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy, should such a risk materialize and threaten the achievement of medium term inflation targets.
The exact mix to be used for policy tightening in such a case will depend on developments regarding domestic demand, capital flows, current account and credit growth.
The Committee expects the impact of the ongoing tightening measures on credit volume and domestic demand to be more significant during the second half of the year.
However, the extent and the timing of the impact may vary depending on the developments beyond the control of monetary policy.
The lagged effects of the policy measures on price and financial stability will be closely monitored and additional measures will be taken if deemed necessary.
The Committee will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while conducting monetary policy.
Sustaining the fiscal discipline under current circumstances is essential to limit the risks posed by the current account deficit driven by the disparity between domestic and external demand.
Saving the extra revenues acquired throughthe tax amnesty and strong economic activity would not only reduce price and financial stability risks, but also increase the efficiency of the new policy mix.
In this respect, inflation forecasts presented in the baseline scenario of the July Inflation Report assume that the extra budget revenues will be saved to a large extent.
A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
To this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the Central Bank and other institutions on the inflation outlook will be assessed carefully.
Committee (Committee) has assessed the recent developments, evaluating the risk scenarios summarized in the Inflation Report, which were also assessed in the July, 21st 2011 meeting.
The Committee indicated that concerns regarding sovereign debt problems in some European economies and the global growth outlook have continued to intensify, increasing the risks highlighted in the July Committee meeting.
Particularly, sovereign debt problems have spread from the peripheral countries of the Euro area to some core countries, and consequently, sovereign borrowing costs in Spain and Italy have reached historically high levels.
These developments have significantly increased the uncertainties regarding global economy.
Moreover, recent indicators on global economic activity have pointed to an increasingly worsening outlook and have been significantly below expectations, speeding up the deterioration in the risk appetite.
Accordingly, the Committee has approved the implementation of a comprehensive package which has been prepared by the Central Bank in order to contain the adverse effects of the prevailing global problems on domestic markets.
The Committee has emphasized that the effects of the monetary policy on the economic activity are observed with some lag and thus the timing of the decision is important.
In order to prepare the ground for an effective liquidity management in case of a further deterioration in the global risk appetite, the following measures were taken regarding Turkish lira and foreign exchange markets o In order to limit the potential downside volatility in the short-term interest rates in case of a need for a rapid injection of liquidity to the market, the Committee has decided to narrow the interest rate corridor via increasing the overnight borrowing rate by 350 basis points.
o A technical adjustment was approved to increase the efficiency of the central bank liquidity management and to facilitate a more balanced provision of liquidity across the system.
To this end, it was agreed that each participating institution’s bid for the weekly repo auctions could be limited by 20percent of the total auction amount.
o In order to mitigate the fluctuations in the repo interest rates, it was agreed that the terms for maintenance period of reserve requirements would be changed.
Accordingly, it was approved that the repo transactions that are subject to required reserves would be computed by taking the average of daily balances between two calculation periods, instead of being computed bi-weekly on Fridays.
Moreover, The Committee has agreed to closely monitor the developments, and if necessary, take measures to provide foreign exchange liquidity via appropriate methods and instruments.
In this context; o It was approved that foreign exchange liquidity would be provided to the market through foreign exchange selling auctions starting from August 5, 2011, on the days deemed necessary.
o Along the same line, it was agreed that reserve requirement rates on foreign exchange liabilities would be decreased, when necessary.
o It was agreed that a measured cut could be exercised for the interest rates at which banks are able to borrow foreign exchange from the Central Bank with one-week maturity, currently at 5.50 for USD and 6.50 for EURO, through the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market within the predetermined limits.
Overall, these measures aim at laying out the ground for a timely, controlled and effective provision of liquidity to the market in case of a possible financial turmoil that may be triggered by global developments.
It was emphasized that, the implications of existing conditions on inflation and current account deficit have been already assessed thoroughly in the preceding meeting of the Committee and it has been agreed that the formulated policy measures would minimize the risks regarding price and financial stability.
The Committee has indicated that both the credit volume and the domestic demand decelerate at a desired pace due to the measures taken so far.In this respect, monthly current account balance is expected to improve steadily.
Recently, both the worsening outlook for global economic activity and rapidly increasing concerns on the debt sustainability in Europe has increased the risk of a renewed slowdown in the global economy.
The Committee members anticipate that the deteriorating growth outlook in Italy and Spain, our major trade partners, could have an adverse impact on external demand, whereas domestic demand would continue to moderate due to rising global uncertainty.
Therefore, the ongoing slowdown in the domestic economic activity is expected to continue in the forthcoming period.
In light of these assessments, the Committee has indicated that the probability of the materialization of downside risks regarding global economy mentioned in the Inflation Report has increased.
Consequently, a measured policy rate cut was delivered, and it was agreed that necessary liquidity support should be provided to the banking system.
The Committee has reiterated that these measures have contained the downside risks for our economy to a considerable extent; however, given the existing state of the global economy, it is important to monitor all developments closely, and to give the required policy response in a timely manner.
Consumer prices went down by 0.41 percent in July, whereas annual inflation edged up to 6.31 percent as envisaged in the July Inflation Report.
Core goods (excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) inflation remained flat in this period, while the services inflation went up.
Therefore, core inflation indicators continued to increase.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages declined to 7.65 percent.
Despite the rise in vegetable and meat prices, unprocessed food prices decreased by 3.65 percent amid the decline in fruit prices.
On the processed food front, prices of bread, cereals and processed meat went up.
Moreover, the rising trend in prices of fats and oils continued, and sugar prices posted an increase.
Accordingly, annual processed food inflation rose to 8.25 percent.
The uptrend in processed food prices is expected to continue in August as well.
Prices of services were up 0.74 percent, while annual services inflation increased to 5.39 percent.
Prices of transport services continued to increase due to higher fuel prices and are expected to remain on the rise over the forthcoming period.
While rents maintained their moderate increase, prices of tour packages soared.
Consequently, the underlying trend of services inflation posted a limited increase.
The recent upward trend in annual core goods inflation halted in July.
Annual inflation maintained its uptrend in clothing but went down in durable goods (excluding gold).
On a month-on-month basis, furniture prices increased, whereas prices of white goods declined.
Committee (the Committee) has noted that core goods inflation may increase temporarily in the short term due to exchange rate pass-through.
Although annual core inflation indicators continued to increase in July, seasonally adjusted monthly data pointed a decline in the recent underlying trend.
Yet, due to exchange rate pass-through, core inflation is expected to increase slightly in August.
Recent data releases confirm the Committee’s assessment that global economic activity continues to decelerate.
Accordingly, external demand remains weak.
Core euro area economies grew at a slower-than-expected pace in the second quarter and July’s PMI data point to a worsening outlook.
In addition, short and medium-term US growth forecasts of various institutions have been revised downward.
The Committee has stated that the global growth outlook is deteriorating amid recent developments in August.
The Committee members have noted that, despite the competitiveness gains due to the recent exchange rate movements, global developments would continue to restrain external demand.
Signals of a slowdown in economic activity are growing stronger.
Seasonally adjusted industrial production data posted a month-on-month decrease of 0.9 percent in June, recording a decline for five consecutive months.
The slowdown in capacity utilization since February became more evident in July, leading to a cumulative decline of about 4 percentage points compared to January.
July data on the expectations for new orders, which serve as a leading indicator, signals that manufacturing activity might remain weak in the third quarter as well.
There is an ongoing slowdown in final domestic demand since the second quarter.
Leading indicators for August suggest that the ongoing weakening in consumer confidence has become more pronounced.
Moreover, investment appetite has decelerated for the first time in a long while.
Domestic sales of automobiles and light commercial vehicles, which remained below the previous quarter’s average in July, are expected to decrease further amid the weakening Turkish lira.
All these developments signal that the slowdown in domestic demand may deepen.
The unemployment rate hovers around pre-crisis levels.
Yet, due to the decline in industrial employment in May, non-farm employment growth slowed and unemployment rates posted a slight quarter-on-quarter increase in seasonally adjusted terms.
Leading indicators suggest that this slowdown in employment would continue in the third quarter as well.
The Committee has noted that inflation may temporarily hover slightly above the levels envisaged in the July Inflation Report and core inflation may continue to rise for some time.
However, due to the slowdown in the economic activity, it is expected that the second round effects of exchange rate movements would be limited, and thus the increase in inflation would be temporary.
Core inflation indicators are expected to start falling again by the end of the year.
Moreover, inflation outlook for the end of 2012 is seen consistent with the 5 percent target.
According to the Committee, in an environment of increasingly slowing economic activity and ongoing macro financial risks, it would not be an optimal response to react to temporary price movements.
However, it was stated that it is important to monitor inflation expectations closely and take the necessary measures if there is a deterioration in the pricing behavior that may hamper the attainment of medium term targets.
The slowdown in credit growth and domestic demand combined with the exchange rate movements have been contributing to the rebalancing of domestic and external demand.
Credit growth continues to slow down across all subcategories, with the deceleration in general purpose consumer loans being more pronounced.
Moreover, cumulative movements in the exchange rate would put a significant restraint on the import demand in the second half of the year.
Accordingly, the Committee expects a notable improvement in the current account balance in the forthcoming period.
It was reiterated that monitoring the seasonally adjusted monthly data is more informative in assessing the underlying trend of the current account balance.
Still, the Committee members have highlighted the important role of structural measures that would boost productivity and increase the saving rate, in order to stabilize the current account deficit at reasonable levels in the medium to long term.
The Committee has agreed that the measures taken at the interim meeting on August 4, 2011 have contained the downside risks for the economy for the time being, and thus decided to keep the policy instruments unchanged at this meeting.
However, given the uncertainties regarding the global economy, it is important to monitor all developments closely, and to deliver the required policy response in a timely manner.
The Committee has also reiterated that all policy instruments may be eased should global economic problems further intensify and the slowdown in domestic economic activity becomes more pronounced.
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda in the medium term would support the relative improvement of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability.
Therefore, addressing these issues in the new Medium Term Program and progressing with the structural reforms envisaged by the European Union acquis communautaire remains of utmost importance.
In August, consumer prices increased by 0.73 percent, and annual inflation went up to 6.65 percent.
Due to exchange rate pass-through on core goods prices, core inflation indicators increased as well.
Meanwhile, prices of services maintainedtheir benign course.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages group dropped to 6 percent.
While unprocessed food prices went up amid the surge in vegetable and meat prices, the annual group inflation went down to 2.98 percent due to the base effect.
In the processed food front, price hikes across sub-groups persisted, mainly in bread and cereals besides fats and oils group.
Thus, annual processed food inflation maintained its recent uptrend climbing to 8.59 percent.
Prices of services edged up by 0.39 percent in August, while annual services inflation increased to 5.68 percent.
The surge in transport prices persisted amid soaring fuel prices.
The rise in processed food prices continued to affect the prices of catering services.
Mild increases in rents continued.
As a result, the impact of exchange rate movements on prices of services remained limited to transport services and no significant change was seen in the underlying trend of the group’s prices.
Annual core goods inflation rose to 6.76 percent owing to the pass-through effect from the depreciation of the Turkish lira.
This rise was particularly driven by the developments in prices of durable goods such as automobile and furniture.
Annual inflation in clothing group maintained its rising trend.
Meanwhile, due to the protective measures taken for imports of textiles and apparel, clothing prices are expected to accelerate in the last quarter of the year.
Second quarter national accounts data offered a more favorable outlook than the one presented in the July Inflation Report.
Quarter-on-quarter economic activity lost momentum as envisaged; however, domestic demand recorded a less-than-expected deceleration.
Meanwhile, due to the plunge in imports, the contribution of net exports to quarterly growth turned out to be positive as envisaged.
Recent data releases suggest that there will be a notable reduction in economic growth in the second half of the year.
Having contracted for five consecutive months, industrial production in seasonally adjusted figures recovered in July.
The Committee noted that this increase in July did not reflect the trends of the recent period marked by intensifying global problems.Indeed,leading indicators forproduction and orders point that the slowdown in economic activity will become more pronounced as of August.
The persistingdecline in the capacity utilization rate in the July-August period compared to the second quarter average indicates that the slowdown in the activity of manufacturing industry continues.
External demand remains weak.The downward revision of growth forecasts for the US and the euro area points to a deteriorating outlook for the global economy.
Referring to themounting uncertainties over growth in the world economy, the Committee noted that despite the competitiveness gains due to the exchange rate movements, global problems would continue to restrain external demand.
Final domestic demand continues to slow down.Due to the depreciation in the Turkish lira, the demand for durable goods, particularly automobile sales, is expected to continue to weaken.
The weakcourse of consumer confidence supports this outlook.
Declining capacity utilization rates and escalating uncertainty for demand pose a downside risk on investments.
All these developments signal that the slowdown in domestic demand will continue.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates, which went up due to the deceleration in employment in May, remained flat in June.
During this period, employment posted an increase in services and construction sectors, but decreased in the industrial sector in line with expectations.
Leading indicators show that this slowdown in industrial employment will continue.
The Committee has noted that core inflation may continue to rise in the short- term.
It was indicated that the pass-through from exchange rates to domestic prices would be observed especially in core goods prices.
The Committee stated that, although headline inflation will fall in September owing to the base effect from unprocessed food prices, itmay exceed the target significantly at the end of the year due to the pass-through effect.
However, due to the slowdown in economic activity, it is expected that the second round effects of exchange rate movements would be limited, and thus the increase in inflation would be temporary.
Accordingly, the Committee has indicated that inflation outlook for the end of 2012 is consistent with the 5 percent target.
The deceleration in credit growth and domestic demand combined with the exchange rate movements have been contributing to the rebalancing of domestic and external demand.
Third quarter data suggest that components of the aggregate demand evolve in the desired direction.
Domestic demand continues to decelerate and there is notable slowdown in imports.
Accordingly, the Committee expects a significant improvement in the current account balance in the forthcoming period.
However, the Committee members have also highlighted the important role of structural measures that would increase the productivity and the saving rate, in order to stabilize the current account deficit at reasonable levels in the medium to long term.
Recently, both the worsening outlook for global economic activity and rapidly increasing concerns on the debt sustainability in Europe has led to a sharp deterioration in the risk appetite.
Given the uncertainties regarding the global economy, it is now more important to monitor all developments closely, and to take the required policy measures in a timely manner.
Therefore, the Committee has also reiterated that all policy instruments may be eased should global economic problems further intensify and the slowdown in domestic economic activity becomes more pronounced.
The Committee members reminded that the measures taken at the August 4, 2011 interim meeting has laid out the ground for a timely, controlled and effective provision of liquidity to the market in case of a possible financial turmoil that may be triggered by global developments.
In this respect, it was stated that developments would be monitored very closely and additional measures may be taken before the regular meeting, if deemed necessary.
Moreover, with reference to the risk scenarios outlined in the Inflation Report, the Committee, has also reiterated that all policy instruments may be eased should global economic problems further intensify and the slowdown in domestic economic activity becomes more pronounced.
Therefore, addressing these issues in the new Medium Term Program and progressing with the structural reforms envisaged by the European Union acquiscommunautaire remains of utmost importance.
In September, consumer prices were up by 0.75 percent and annual inflation went down to 6.15 percent.
As envisaged, the annual rate of core price indicators kept rising parallel to the exchange rate movements, while the underlying trend of the prices of services remained moderate in sub-categories except transportation.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages group declined to 2.23 percent due to the base effect in unprocessed food prices.
Besides the base effects, monthly unprocessed food prices displayed a positive outlook owing to the prices of fruits and vegetables as well.
On the other hand, price increases which spread across sub-categories in the processed food group continued in September, bringing annual inflation up to9.07 percent.
Floods in October are estimated to push up the unprocessed food prices to some extent; however, the high base effect of the last year is expected to contain the group's annual inflation.
Prices of services rose by 0.88 percent in September, and annual services inflation went up to 6.36 percent.
Price increases in fuel and processed food continued to spill over into prices of transport and catering services.
In September, annual inflation went up across all sub-categories of services, while underlying trend was more benign, as suggested by the seasonally adjusted data.
Annual core goods inflation reached 7.64 percent in September amid the depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Prices of durable consumer goods became the largest contributor of this increase.
The annual inflation in clothing group, which has been rising steadily since November 2010, declined in September.
However, this is likely to reflect the season-specific temporary discounts.
Owing to the protective measures in textiles and apparel imports, inflation in the clothing group is expected to rise again in the last quarter of the year.
Administered price increases will have an upward effect on inflation in the short term.
The Special Consumption Tax rates were raised on some motor vehicles, mobile phones, alcoholic beverages and tobacco products by a Decision by the Board of Ministers, which was published on the Official Gazette on October 13, 2011.
The impact of the tax hikes on consumer inflation will occur mainly through the increases in the prices of tobacco products, while the contribution of other items will remain relatively small.
The August data justified the Committee's evaluation that production developments in July do not reflect the main trend.
As a matter of fact, seasonally adjusted industrial production contracted in August, returning to the levels in June.
The Committee stated that global problems would continue to restrain industrial activity.
Final domestic demand continues to slow down.
Due to the depreciation in the Turkish Lira, the demand for durable goods, particularly the sales of vehicles, is expected to keep weakening.
Besides the weak course of consumer confidence, the marked slowdown in loans supports this view.
In addition to credit developments, the low levels of capacity utilization rates and mounting uncertainty in demand put a cap on investments.
All of these developments signal that the slowdown in domestic demand may persist.
External demand remains weak.
Recent downward revision of growth forecasts for the U.S. and the euro area points to a steadily worsening outlook for the global economy.
The Committee underlined that the outlook for the world economy noticeably deteriorated compared to the first half of the year and that global problems would continue to restrain foreign demand.
Recent data releases suggest that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand is ongoing as envisaged.
The Committee stated that external demand remains weak, yet the persisting slowdown in domestic demand would restrain imports in the forthcoming period.
With the credit growth decelerating to more reasonable levels, the desired increase in private savings has already started to take place.
Accordingly, the Committee has noted that there is a significant improvement in the current account balance and this trend will be more evident in the final quarter of the year.
In July, seasonally adjusted non-farm employment posted a limited increase, while unemployment rates declined owing to the fall in the labor force participation rate.
In this period, increases remained modest in the services and construction sectors, which have been marked by high employment growth rates since the second half of 2010.
Meanwhile, the downward trend in the industrial sector employment continued.
Leading indicators point that employment conditions in the industrial sector are expected to remain weak.
Given the slowdown in economic activity, the Committee envisaged that employment conditions in the particular service sectors such as trade and transport-communications would deteriorate.
The Committee has assessed the forecasts prepared for the October Inflation Report.
It was indicated that inflation would rise significantly in the upcoming months due to the recent excessive depreciation of the Turkish lira, base effects from unprocessed food prices and the recent adjustments in administered prices.
The Committee has reached full agreement stating that the Central Bank should not tolerate these developments to have an adverse impact on medium term inflation expectations and inflation outlook.
In this respect, the Committee has decided to widen the interest rate corridor by increasing the lending rate significantly.
The projections have been based on the assumption that the policy reaction of the Central Bank will prevent the second round effects.
Moreover, the Committee members indicated that, given the weak prospects for the global economy, the course of commodity prices would also support the disinflation process.
Accordingly, the forecasts were based on an outlook where inflation decelerates gradually starting from early 2012 and materializes at levels close to target by the end of 2012.
The fact that inflation will hover above target in the short term poses risks regarding inflation expectations and price setting behavior.
The Committee has adopted a policy stance as of October aiming to eliminate these risks.
The risks will be closely monitored and necessary measures will be taken to avoid a deterioration in the inflation outlook.
The medium term projections assume that global outlook will stay weak for a long period, but the situation will not worsen further.
Nevertheless, the Committee members noted that uncertainties regarding the global economy continue to be an important concern.
Especially, mounting problems regarding sovereign debt of the euro area economies continue to pose downside risks on the global economy.
Concerns regarding the debt sustainability of euro area economies have further increased since the publication of the July Inflation Report, increasing the concerns of a possible contagion to region’s banking sector.
The Committee will continue to monitor global developments closely; and in line with the strategy formulated at the interim meeting of August 4, 2011, will take the needed measures promptly to maintain the stability in the domestic financial markets.
In this respect, our forecasts presented in the baseline scenario take the Medium Term Program as given and thus assume that fiscal discipline will be maintained.
A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium- term inflation outlook.
To this end, the impact of the macroprudential measures taken by the CBRT and other institutions on the inflation outlook will be assessed carefully.
Sustaining the fiscal discipline will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and support the social welfare by keeping long term interest rates permanently at low levels.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the new Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.
In October, consumer prices were up 3.27 percent and annual inflation climbed to 7.66 percent.
October price developments were highlighted by increases in administered prices, which contributed to the monthly inflation by 1.35 percentage points.
While core goods inflation continued to increase parallel to the exchange rate movements, the prices of services maintaineda moderate course in this period.
Administered prices went up due to the tax hikes and adjustments in energy prices.
In this period, the Special Consumption Tax (SCT) rates were raised on some motor vehicles, mobile phones, alcoholic beverages and tobacco products.
As foreseen, the largest contributor to inflation within SCT hikes became tobacco products with 0.8 percentage points.
Price adjustments in energy due to the increases in electricity and natural gas tariffs added 0.5 percentage points to inflation.
Moreover, it should be noted that the adjustments in tobacco products will further contribute around 0.2 percentage points to November inflation.
Despite an increase by 4.04 percent in the prices of food and alcoholic beverages in October, annual inflation in this group continued to decline due to the base effect in unprocessed food prices.
Owing to the price increases in fresh fruits and vegetables amid adverse weather conditions, unprocessed food prices rose by 7.56 percent.
On the processed food front, the rise in annual inflation came to a halt in October.
Due to the rapid increases in unprocessed food prices and the base effects, annual food inflation is expected to rise markedly during the last two months of the year.
Prices of services rose by 0.56 percent in October, and annual services inflation went up to 6.63 percent.
Seasonally adjusted data point to a deceleration in services inflation.
Annual core goods inflationcontinued to increase in this period due to the ongoing exchange rate pass-through, reaching 8.77 percent in October.
This rise was attributed to durable goods prices in particular.
Meanwhile annual inflation went up in theclothing group as well.
Thus, the annual inflation of the core price indicators displayed an increase, while the seasonally adjusted data exhibited a relatively milder trend.
Recent data releases point to a notable reduction in economic growth in the second half of the year.
Industrial production displayed a modest growthconsistent with the slowing domestic demand and deteriorating global outlook.
Capacity utilization rates remained below the pre-crisis levels.
The Committee noted that global problems would continue to put a cap on the industrial activity in the forthcoming period.
The final domestic demand continues to slowdown.
The depreciation in the Turkish Lira and recent tax adjustments coupled with the uncertainties regarding the global economy, are expected to weaken the demand for durable goods, particularly the sales of vehicles, in the forthcoming period.
Besides, the decline in consumer and investor confidence feed into this downtrend.Moreover, the recent and notable slowdown in consumer loans also supports this outlook.
The Committee indicated that the lagged effects of the policy measures undertaken since November 2010 to rebalancethe domestic and external demand would be more pronounced in the last quarter of the year.
Additionally, the restrictiveimpact of global problems on the externalfinancing may contribute to the tightening in domestic lending conditions in the forthcoming period.
Besidesthe developments in credit conditions, thelow levels in capacity utilization rates coupled with the mounting uncertainties in demand pose a downward risk on investments.
All these indicators signal that the deceleration in domestic demand will continue.
Recent downward revision of medium-term growth forecasts for the U.S. and the euro area points to a steadily worsening outlook for the global economy.
The Committee underlined that the outlook for the world economy noticeably deteriorated compared to the first half of the year and that global problems would continue to restrain foreign demand notwithstanding the competitive advantage provided by the exchange rate movements.
Parallel to the economic activity, the slowdown in seasonally adjusted non- farm employment continued in August.
Meanwhile, unemployment rates declined owing to the fall in the labor force participation rate.
Contrary to the robust course in the construction sector, employment in services slowed down, driven by trade, restaurants, hotels, transport and communication.
Employment in the industrial sector declined in this period, whereas leading indicators point that global problems will continue to put a cap on the employment conditions in the sector.
In light of these developments, the Committee has indicated that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand is ongoing as envisaged.
The rebalancing takes place through imports, as the external demand remains weak due to prevailing problems regarding the global economy.
In fact, seasonally adjusted real imports data suggest to a slowdown since the second quarter.
The Committee has underscored the key role of credits in the rebalancing process.
Recent slowdown in credit growth has been restraining the amount of expenditures financed through borrowing.
Accordingly, the improvement in the current account balance is expected to become more significant in the final months of the year.
The Committee has noted that inflation will display a rapid increase in the short-term due to the base effects from unprocessed food prices.
Base effect will be stronger in November and inflation is expected to exceed the target significantly at the end of the year.
The Central Bank has delivered a strong tightening in October in order to prevent the potential second round effects of this development.
The tightening is having an impact on credit and domestic demand as of the final quarter.
In this respect, domestic demand is expected to follow a moderate path and second round effects of the temporary price movements will be contained in the forthcoming periods.
The Committee members have emphasized the importance of having a flexible monetary policy framework against the exceptionally high level of uncertainty across global financial markets.
Currently, active use of the interest rate corridor through effective liquidity management provides the required flexibility.
In this context, monetary policy stance can be changed at a daily frequency by adjusting the liquidity operations.
The impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the amount of Turkish lira funding via one-week repo auctions will be timely adjusted on both sides, if needed.
Developments in the financial markets are monitored closely because of the persisting uncertainty regarding global economy.
Especially, ongoing concerns on the sovereign debt dynamics in the euro area and the possibility of a contagion to financial markets which would further deepen the global problems emerge as a main risk factor.
In line with the strategy formulated at the interim meeting of August 4, 2011, the Committee will continue to monitor global developments closely and take the needed measures promptly to maintain the stability in the domestic financial markets.
In November, consumer prices were up 1.73 percent and annual inflation rose by 1.8 percentage points to 9.48 percent.
The contribution of food prices to annual inflation increased significantly amid the reversing base effects from unprocessed food prices.
Core goods inflation continued to rise parallel to the exchange rate movements.
While the prices of services maintained a relatively moderate course, changes in administered prices continued to feed into inflation in November.
Committee (the Committee) noted that inflation would increase in December due to the base effects from unprocessed food prices.
Prices of food and alcoholic beverages increased by 3.27 percent in November, and annual inflation in this group went up by 5.4 percentage points to 7.11 percent.
As also stated in the Summary of the November Meeting, this rise mainly stems from the base effect from unprocessed food prices.
However, it should be also noted that in the unprocessed food group, prices of fruits and vegetables posted larger increases than the previous periods.
Moreover, annual inflation in processed food mounted to 9.44 percent owing to the cost factors.
Annual food inflation is projected to surge in December owing to unprocessed food prices.
Administered prices went up due to the adjustments in energy prices and tax hikes especially in tobacco products in October.
As foreseen, these tax adjustments were influential also in November and contributed to annual inflation by 0.2 percentage points.
Hence, the total contribution of adjustments in administered prices to annual inflation became approximately 1.6 percentage points within the last two months.
Prices of services rose by 0.37 percent in November, and annual services inflation remained unchanged.
Despite the rise in annual rate of increase in the prices of services excluding transport and catering, seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices indicate that the benign trend is maintained in the prices of services.
Annual core goods inflation rose approximately by 1 percentage point to 9.8 percent in November.
Pass-through from depreciation of the Turkish lira is still affecting the prices of durable goods.
Meanwhile, amid the hikes in import duties on textiles and ready-wear, seasonally adjusted clothing inflation went up in this period.
Thus, core inflation indicators displayed an increase both on an annual basis and in seasonally adjusted monthly terms in November.
The Committee assessed that economic activity was robust and underlined the necessity to contain domestic demand considering the inflation outlook.
Recent indicators signal that the economic activity remains robust in the last quarter as well.
While industrial production surged in October, capacity utilization rate maintained its uptrend in November.
Meanwhile, labor market developments point to a strong course in non-industrial sectors as well.
Unemployment rates continued to fall in line with non-farm employment developments in September.
Moreover, sectors like construction and services, relatively less sensitive sectors to external developments, stood out with their high contributions to the rise in employment.
The Committee highlighted the robust course of the demand for goods and services, mostly determined by current income, therefore employment conditions, notwithstanding the signals for a slowdown in durables and investment goods, which are more sensitive to exchange rates and financing conditions.
Meanwhile, the additional measures taken towards monetary tightening in October coupled with the ongoing global problems are expected to contain credit facility and the domestic-demand-side pressures.
In fact, the slowdown in the consumer loan growth is becoming more pronounced.
Amid the recently aggravated problems regarding the euro area, medium-term growth forecasts for the global economy have been revised downwards.
The global outlook for 2012 points to a slowdown in almost all economies.
Thus, the Committee underlined that global problems would continue to restrain foreign demand notwithstanding the improved market diversification and enhanced competitiveness provided by exchange rate movements.
It was also stated that while foreign demand remains subdued, containing effects of the ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira on imports has become obvious.
In this context, it was highlighted that the improvement in the current account balance would become more pronounced through the end of the year.
Data on the third quarter of the year confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand is ongoing as envisaged.
Final domestic demand is decelerating and the contribution of net external demand to growth is increasing.
Accordingly, the improvement in the current account balance is becoming more pronounced.
The Committee has indicated that the correction in the current account balance is more evident in seasonally adjusted data and this trend will be reflected shortly in the annualized series.
The Central Bank delivered a strong tightening in October in order to prevent the potential second round effects of 2011 year-end inflation that will exceed the target significantly.
Shorter end of the market yield curve has shifted upwards suggesting that monetary stance is tight.
Moreover, loan rates have increased after the tightening.
Although recent data releases suggest that the economic activity is stronger than expected, domestic demand is expected to follow a moderate path due to monetary tightening.
Therefore, the Committee expects second round effects of the temporary price movements to remain contained and inflation to fall gradually throughout 2012, converging to 5 percent target during the final months of the year.
The Committee believes that medium term inflationary pressures are contained through the measures taken; yet the pricing behavior and inflation expectations should be closely monitored given the current high levels of inflation.
Inflation is likely to stay at high levels during the first few months of 2012 due to exchange rate pass-through, administered price hikes and adverse developments in unprocessed food prices.
In this respect, the Committee has indicated that tight monetary policy should be maintained for a while in order to keep inflation outlook consistent with the medium term targets.
However, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of monetary policy.
Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the amount of Turkish lira funding via one-week repo auctions will be timely adjusted on either direction, if needed.
Moreover, the Committee has determined the main components of the “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy in 2012” document, which was published on Tuesday, December 27.
The Committee has indicated that the flexibility provided by the interest rate corridor system has been alleviating the adverse effects of the capital flow volatility on the domestic economy.
However, the Committee has also noted that it would be useful to increase the predictability, conditional on the developments in the global economy.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to announce some arrangements regarding the Turkish lira and foreign exchange liquidity management prior to the press meeting on December 27.
Maintenance of the fiscal discipline and strengthening the commitment to structural reform agenda in the medium term would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate macroeconomic and price stability.
In December, consumer prices were up 0.58 percent and annual inflation reached 10.45 percent.
As stated in the previous Summary of the .
Committee (the Committee) Meeting, annual food inflation surged owing to unprocessed food prices in December.
Annual core goods inflation continued to rise due to the lagged effects of the exchange rate pass-through.
Meanwhile, the uptrend in core inflation indicators came to a halt owing to the moderate course of the services prices.
Prices of food and alcoholic beverages increased by 1.97 percent in December, and annual inflation in this group went up to 12.21 percent.
Processed food prices continued to increase, albeit at a slower pace.
The sharp rise in the prices of vegetables pushed up the unprocessed good inflation significantly.
Thus, quarterly inflation in this group recorded the historically highest increase since the inception of the new CPI index.
Coupled with the low base effect, this surge led the contribution of unprocessed food prices to increase by 2.5 percentage points in one quarter.
Prices of services rose by 0.29 percent in December, and annual services inflation fell to 6.27 percent due to the high base of the communication services.
Annual inflation increased slightly in rents as well as in restaurant and hotel services.
Prices of transport services, which have been trending upwards recently amid the depreciation of the Turkish lira, remained flat on monthly terms.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted prices of services and diffusion index indicate a slowdown in the underlying trend of service inflation.
Core goods inflation rose to 10.09 percent in December.
Having recorded a decline in clothing and footwear group, annual inflation continued to rise in core goods excluding clothing amid the lagged effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Exchange rate pass-through effects on core goods prices are expected to persist in January, albeit at milder extent.
Data releases on the final quarter of 2011 suggest that economic activity decelerated slightly, yet remained robust.
Seasonally adjusted industrial production posted a stronger quarterly increase in the October-November period, while the capacity utilization rate trended upwards following a decline in two subsequent quarters.
As for the services sector, employment maintains its stable upward trend.
Amid the monetary tightening implemented since October and the ongoing global problems, domestic demand is expected to follow a moderate path in the forthcoming period, as suggested by recent trends in consumer loan growth and firms’ domestic orders.
Moreover, the moderate course of domestic real turnover indices of the manufacturing industry as of the onset of 2011 continued in the October-November period, which indicates that final domestic demand has not accelerated further.
Amid the recently aggravated problems in the euro area, medium-term growth forecasts for the global economy have been revised downwards.
It was also highlighted that restrictive effects of the ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira on imports has become more evident.
Seasonally adjusted non-farm employment posted a decline in October after an extended steady-growth period, interrupting the stable downtrend in unemployment rates.
The fall in non-farm employment was driven by the construction and industrial sectors.
The Committee has noted that the recent decline in construction employment may continue further, while the industrial sector employment may post an increase in the short-term.
Recent data releases confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand is ongoing as envisaged.
Accordingly, the rebalancing process and the improvement in the current account deficit would continue in the forthcoming period.
The Committee has noted that annual inflation will stay at high levels in the short- term due to accumulated price increases that occurred during the final quarter of 2011.
In order to prevent the potential second round effects, the Central Bank has delivered an important monetary tightening since October.
Accordingly, domestic demand is expected to follow a moderate path in the forthcoming period, as suggested by recent trends in consumer loan growth and firms’ domestic orders.
Therefore, the Committee expects second round effects of the temporary price movements to remain contained and disinflation process to accelerate, especially in the final quarter of 2012 with the support of base effects.
In light of the past three months’ developments, the Committee has assessed the inflation forecast to appear in the January Inflation Report.
The committee members indicated that reducing inflation from 10.45 percent to 5 percent target within 12 months would lead to unfavorable fluctuations in economic activity; accordingly, it would be more appropriate to bring inflation back to the target in one and a half year.
In other words, the baseline forecast would envisage inflation to reach the target of 5 percent by mid-2013.
However, the target might be attained by the end of 2012, should the risk appetite improve markedly in the forthcoming period and the capital flows towards emerging economies re- accelerate, leading to a strong appreciation of the Turkish lira.
The Committee has indicated that tight monetary policy stance should be maintained for a while in order to keep inflation outlook consistent with the medium term targets.
However, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy.
Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the amount of Turkish lira funding via one-week repo auctions will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
Moreover, considering the ongoing improvement in the current account dynamics and the sudden swings in global conditions, the Committee has indicated that intraday foreign exchange sale auctions will be more effective and more consistent with the monetary policy objectives, compared to the regular foreign exchange sale auctions.
The Committee noted that inflation will hover at high levels in the short term, and this poses risks regarding second round effects.
Although the monetary tightening delivered by the Central Bank since October has reduced the possibility of second round effects, inflation expectations and pricing behavior will be monitored closely and necessary measures will be taken to keep medium-term inflation outlook consistent with the target.
According to the Committee members, the probability that the solution of the problems in the euro area may take a more protracted and painful process poses downside risks regarding global growth and risk appetite.
On the other hand, perceptions regarding global economic outlook may turn more favorable than expected, should the measures taken towards the solution completed sooner and more decisively than envisaged.
Such a situation, coupled with the ongoing quantitative easing policies pursued by the central banks of advanced economies, may improve risk appetite and re-accelerate capital flows towards emerging economies.
Overall, ongoing problems regarding euro area and uncertainties on the effectiveness of measures aimed at solving these problems, suggest that global financial markets will continue to be volatile in the forthcoming period.
These conditions necessitate a flexible approach in monetary policy, which utilizes multiple instruments.
The Committee will continue to monitor global developments closely and take the required measures promptly.
Another risk for the forthcoming period is the uncertainty regarding oil prices.
Although weak global outlook dampens commodity prices, rising oil supply problems recently pose upside risks regarding energy prices.
Should such a risk materialize, the Committee will not respond to temporary price movements, yet will not tolerate any deterioration in expectations.
The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
Current monetary policy takes the Medium Term Program as given and thus assumes that fiscal discipline will be maintained.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term.
This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contribute to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In this respect, steps towards implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance.
In January, consumer prices were up 0.56 percent and annual inflation reached 10.61 percent.
While the lagged effects of the exchange rate pass-through continued through the prices of core goods, services prices followed a moderate course in this period.
Annual inflation in food and alcoholic beverages group went down to 11.67 percent.
Seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices slowed down in January following a notable increase in the last quarter of 2011.
Although processed food prices went up by 1.06 percent in the same period, annual inflation in this group recorded a decline after a long period.
Leading indicators suggest that food inflation will continue to decrease in February.
Among subcategories, energy prices stood out recording the highest increase in January.
Owing to the increases in all subcategories, primarily in water tariffs and fuel prices, energy prices went up by 2.19 percent in this period.
International oil prices posted an upward trend in the first two months of the year, posing upside risks on consumer prices.
Annual services inflation increased modestly up to 6.33 percent.
Although annual inflation edged up in transport services, the favorable outlook continued in other services prices.
Despite the high course of consumer inflation, rent increases remained at low levels.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted prices of services and diffusion index suggest that the underlying trend of service inflation has sustained its benign outlook.
Annual inflation in core goods climbed to 10.70 percent in January.
Lagged effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira on core goods continued especially through durable goods in this period.
Nevertheless, the prices of core goods are expected to follow a milder path amid the recent moderation in cost pressures.
Committee (the Committee) expects core inflation indicators to follow a downward trend starting from February.
Data releases on the final quarter of 2011 suggest that economic activity has remained robust.
Seasonally adjusted industrial production posted a sizeable increase in December, and remained well above the average of the previous period on a quarterly basis.
Although construction sector displayed a slowdown, employment in the services sector maintained a stable upward trend.
Following the robust course in the last quarter of 2011, economic activity lost momentum owing to domestic demand.
Domestic sales of automobiles and commercial vehicles posted a decline in January.
In the meanwhile, expectations on domestic new orders in the manufacturing industry moderated.
Consumer confidence remained weak in February; and seasonally adjusted consumer loans recorded a mild growth.
Final domestic demand is decelerating while the contribution of net exports to growth is increasing.
The recovery in global PMI indices in January suggests that there is no further deterioration in global outlook compared to the last quarter of 2011, and supports the gradual improvement in exports.
Despite the recent policy actions towards a more expansionary monetary stance at a global scale slightly alleviate the downside risks on global growth, the outlook for 2012 still signals for a slowdown in almost all economies.
Highlighting that global uncertainties still remain significant, the Committee has noted that global problems will continue to restrain foreign demand, notwithstanding the improved market diversification and enhanced competitiveness provided by exchange rate movements.
The Committee also stated that restrictive effects of the ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira on imports have become more evident.
Accordingly, the rebalancing process and the improvement in the current account deficit will continue in the forthcoming period.
Labor market data confirm that there is no significant and widespread deceleration in overall economic activity.
As opposed to the decline in employment in the industrial and construction sectors in the last quarter of 2011, non-farm employment remained robust thanks to the strong course of the services sector.
Although leading indicators for the first quarter of 2012 do not indicate any deterioration in employment conditions, the Committee has noted that the impact of global uncertainties on the domestic economy may continue to restrain employment growth in the period ahead.
Recent data releases confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged.
The measures undertaken in 2011 have not only led the credit growth rate to decline to more reasonable levels but also removed the excessive appreciation pressure on the exchange rate; and both of these factors contribute the economy to attain a more stable growth composition.
The Committee has indicated that although there is a noticeable slowdown in the economic activity due to weaker domestic demand in early 2012, this slowdown largely reflects temporary and seasonal factors.
The Committee members stated that domestic demand may recover in the forthcoming period with the improved risk appetite and increasing capital inflows.
In fact, both the production of investment goods and new investment plans of manufacturing firms remain robust, suggesting that there is no significant deterioration in demand expectations.
Starting from February, core inflation indicators are expected to follow a downward path due to favorable cost factors.
The pass-through impact of the exchange rate developments in 2011 to annual core goods inflation is expected to ease in February.
In the meanwhile, services prices are expected to follow a benign path in parallel to the moderation in domestic demand.
Developments since the Committee meeting in January have eased the adverse impact of the Euro area-related problems on global markets, leading to a significant increase in risk appetite.
This, in turn, has lowered the likelihood of a sudden capital outflow in the short-term due to a possible sharp swing in global risk perceptions.
Therefore, also considering the recent expansionary monetary policy decisions at a global scale, the Committee has decided to cut the upper limit of the interest rate corridor.
Although the Committee members expect inflation to follow a downward trend in the forthcoming period, they have also noted that inflation will hover above the target for some time.
Inflation expectations are under control and there is no significant deterioration in the pricing behavior.
Both of these factors are seen as favorable developments for medium term inflation outlook.
However, recent supply-side increases in energy prices pose risks to inflation.
In light of these assessments, the Committee has indicated that the cautious monetary policy stance should be maintained for a while in order to keep inflation outlook consistent with the medium term targets.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit will support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term.
In this respect, steps towards the implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance.
In February, consumer prices were up 0.56 percent and annual inflation went down to 10.43 percent.
Committee (the Committee) Meeting, food inflation decreased, while energy prices increased amid the soaring international oil prices in this period.
Core inflation indicators posted a decline after a long interval and services maintained their moderate course.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages group continued with their downward trends.
Amid the sustained favorable outlook in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables compared to the seasonal averages, unprocessed food inflation went down to 13.21 percent in February.
Similarly, annual processed food inflation decreased in this period as it did in January.
Nevertheless, leading indicators suggest that annual inflation in both main food groups may increase in March.
In February, repercussions of international oil price developments continued through fuel prices and annual energy inflation increased approximately by 1 percentage point to 12.60 percent due to the low base.
Uncertainties in oil prices pose upside risks to the inflation outlook.
As a matter of fact, leading indicators suggest that the increase in energy prices will persist in March as well.
Annual services inflation edged down to 6.27 percent.
Annual inflation in transport services, which has recently trended upwards amid the increase in fuel prices, posted a slowdown, while services prices excluding catering and transport remained flat at 4.9 percent.
Rent increases stood at low levels in this period as well.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted prices of services and diffusion index suggest that the underlying trend of service inflation has sustained its mild outlook.
Due to the developments in the prices of durable goods, annual inflation in core goods recorded a decline, while seasonally adjusted clothing prices increased further.
In line with the alleviation of the cumulative effects of exchange rate movements, the decline annual core goods inflation is expected to continue in the period ahead.
Following the robust course in the final quarter of 2011, economic activity displayed a domestic-demand-driven deceleration in the first quarter of 2012.
Seasonally adjusted industrial production plummeted in January below the average of the previous quarter.
Domestic sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles posted a decline in the January-February period compared to the average of the previous quarter.
Moreover, seasonally adjusted consumer loans confirmed the deceleration in domestic demand in the first quarter of the year.
Leading indicators suggest a modest recovery in consumption demand in the second quarter.
Despite its low level, consumer confidence has improved in recent months.
Following the decline in January, expectations on domestic new orders have assumed a gradual recovery trend.
Additionally, the absence of any notable setback in new investment plans of the manufacturing firms coupled with the consistent upward trend in non-farm employment indicate that there is no permanent deterioration in expectations on demand.
The Committee attributed the slowdown in economic activity in the early 2012 to temporary factors besides the tightening policy measures, and assessed that domestic demand would resume its upward trend in the period ahead.
Recent developments indicate that the rebalancing between domestic and external demand continues in the first quarter.
Notwithstanding the persisting problems in the European economy, exports continue to grow at a steady pace.
The ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira continue to restrict the import demand and non-energy current account deficit.
Accordingly, despite the elevated oil prices, the gradual improvement in the current account balance is expected to continue in the forthcoming period.
The Committee highlighted that the correction in the 12-month cumulative current account deficit, which started in November, would become more pronounced in late March.
Labor market data confirm the deceleration in economic activity.
Employment in the construction sector continues to decline, employment in the services sector has recently lost pace.
However, having noted that the two subsequent months of decline came to a halt in industrial employment, the Committee stated that employment would continue to grow modestly amid the recovery in economic activity.
As a matter of fact, survey data point to a partial recovery in job opportunities.
Nevertheless, the possible domestic consequences of global uncertainties on economic activity stand out as the factors that may restrain employment growth in the period ahead.
The Committee has indicated that both the level and the composition of the economic activity as well as the bank lending evolve as expected.
Accordingly, economic activity is anticipated to pick up gradually starting from the second quarter.
Although loan growth rate may accelerate somewhat in the forthcoming period, seasonally adjusted values are expected to stay in line with the assumptions of the January Inflation Report.
The Committee has stated that short term inflation developments are also in line with the path projected in the Inflation Report.
Oil prices hover at higher levels than assumed in the baseline scenario, leading to a higher than expected path in energy prices.
However, so far this is largely offset by the favorable outlook in unprocessed food prices.
According to the Committee members, energy prices pose upside risks regarding the short-term inflation outlook, whereas risks are on the downside for unprocessed food prices.
Especially, it is stated that possible hikes in electricity and natural gas rates could lead to a significant increase in energy prices.
The Committee has underscored that supply side developments will be closely monitored and any deterioration in inflation expectations will not be tolerated.
Given the current levels of inflation, it is important to prevent upside risks.
Therefore, the Central Bank has implemented a new round of additional monetary tightening in order to eliminate the impact of recent cost developments on inflation expectations.
Factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored in the forthcoming period and additional monetary tightening will be repeated, when necessary.
Given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy.
Therefore, the impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
Moreover, taking the liquidity projections into account, the ranges for weekly and monthly Turkish lira funding have been revised.
In addition, certain revisions regarding the fraction of required reserves that can be held in gold have been approved.
The Committee indicated that these measures will support financial stability, yet they will not have a significant impact on the stance of monetary policy.
These measures will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contribute to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In March, consumer prices were up 0.41 percent and annual inflation remained unchanged at 10.43 percent.
The surge in annual energy inflation continued amid the soaring international oil prices in this period.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in core goods group decelerated, and the moderate course of services continued to contain consumer inflation.
In food and nonalcoholic beverages group, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices went down in March due to developments in fresh fruits and vegetables.
As for the processed food group, monthly rate of increase of prices slowed down considerably, while annual inflation remained high on account of the cumulative effects.
In March, the surge in fuel prices amid soaring international oil prices and the depreciation in the Turkish lira became the main driver of the rise in annual energy inflation.
It is expected that the rises in natural gas and electricity tariffs, to be effective as of April, will increase energy prices further; and these increases will have a direct contribution of around 0.5 point to consumer prices.
On the services front, annual inflation in all subcategories other than restaurants and hotels went down, while the historically low rate of month-on-month increase in rents became noteworthy in this period.
Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices suggest that the prices of services sustain a mild outlook.
As for the core goods group, the fading effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira on durable goods prices pulled annual inflation downwards.
Nevertheless, the upward trend in core goods inflation excluding durable goods, clothing in particular, continued in March.
National income data for the last quarter of 2011 remained broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report.
Accordingly, economic activity displayed a mild growth on a quarterly basis, and the balancing in demand components continued at a strengthening pace.
As a matter of fact, domestic demand followed almost a flat course, while net external demand became the main driver of both quarterly and annual growth in this period.
The Committee stated that economic activity has been losing momentum for a while, and this deceleration became more pronounced in the first quarter of 2012, which was attributed to domestic demand.
Having plummeted in January, industrial production index picked up slightly in February, but January-February average has stood below the average of the previous quarter.
In the first quarter, domestic sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles posted a quarter-on- quarter decline.
Meanwhile, having exhibited a mild growth, seasonally adjusted consumer loans confirmed the slowdown in domestic demand.
Moreover, the absence of any notable setback in new investment plans of the manufacturing firms coupled with the consistent upward trend in non-farm employment indicate that there is no permanent deterioration in expectations on demand.
The Committee attributed the slowdown in economic activity in the early 2012 to the tightening policy measures besides some temporary factors such as adverse weather conditions and external uncertainties, and assessed that domestic demand would resume its upward trend in the period ahead.
Recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged.
The recovery in the 12-month cumulative current account deficit, which started in November, is expected to become more pronounced in March and April.
As for the medium and long term, the Committee highlighted that the new incentive package based on state aid in investments would pull the current account deficit downwards and bolster growth on the supply side as well.
Labor market data point that employment losses in the industrial and construction sectors halted, and employment in these sectors has assumed a re-increasing trend.
The Committee estimates that rises in employment will continue in the forthcoming period owing to the improvement in economic activity.
As a matter of fact, survey data point to a favorable outlook in job opportunities.
Moreover, first quarter indicators signal for a mild growth in employment.
Nevertheless, the ongoing downside risks on global economy may restrain employment growth in the period ahead.
In light of the past three months’ developments, the Committee has assessed the inflation forecast to appear in the April Inflation Report.
The Committee members have indicated that main factors affecting inflation are broadly in line with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report.
Yet, it was noted that inflation may hover above the envisaged path in the short term due to hikes in energy prices.
The Committee stated that it will not tolerate temporary factors to have an adverse impact on the inflation outlook.
Accordingly, it was underscored that additional monetary tightening may be implemented more frequently in the forthcoming period.
In other words, notwithstanding the upward revision in energy prices, inflation forecast for end-2012 remained intact at 6.5 percent due to the offsetting impact of tighter monetary policy.
In this respect, the inflation forecast is based on the assumption that credit growth will be milder and output gap will be wider compared to the January Inflation Report.
The Committee has indicated that inflation is will follow a volatile course in the second quarter.
The direct effects of electricity and natural gas price hikes on April inflation is expected to be around 0.5 percentage points.
Therefore, inflation will increase temporarily and reach its peak in April.
Due to base effects in unprocessed food prices, annual inflation is expected to display a sharp fall in May, and a modest increase in June.
It is expected that the tight monetary policy implemented by the Central Bank since October will contain the second round effects, and thus inflation will follow a downward path once the cumulative impacts of temporary factors taper off.
Accordingly, the Committee expects that inflation will decline gradually starting from the third quarter and the downward trend will become more evident during the final quarter of the year.
According to the Committee members, existing high levels of inflation and the recent deterioration in short-term inflation expectations pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Annual inflation is expected to hover significantly above the target until the final quarter of the year due to the sharp price increases witnessed during the last three months of 2011, which necessitates a close monitoring of the pricing behavior.
Although the monetary tightening implemented since October has reduced the possibility of second round effects, the Committee will adopt a cautious approach by monitoring inflation expectations closely, and will take necessary measures to keep medium-term inflation outlook consistent with the target.
Ongoing uncertainties regarding global economy require the maintenance of a flexible approach in monetary policy against possible volatilities in capital flows.
Although sovereign debt problems in the euro area have eased somewhat during the first quarter of the year, bleak growth prospects and still-high borrowing costs across the region keep the debt sustainability debates alive.
Moreover, deleveraging in the euro area banking system feeds into financial fragilities, increasing the probability of a renewed deterioration in the risk appetite.
On the other hand, the risk appetite may recover faster than expected, should the measures taken towards the solution of problems regarding the global economy are completed sooner and more decisively than envisaged.
Accordingly, the Committee stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy.
Another risk for the forthcoming period is the uncertainty regarding the oil price outlook.
Although weak global outlook dampens the upside pressures on commodity prices, prevailing supply-side problems pose an upside risk in the short term regarding energy prices.
Unprocessed food prices pose downside risks for the inflation outlook in 2012.
The probability of a downward correction in unprocessed food prices due to the high base attained by end-2011, coupled with favorable precipitation during the recent months, increase the likelihood of a more benign unprocessed food price path than implied by the assumptions.
Inflation may reach the target faster than projected in the baseline scenario, should the food prices display a more favorable course than expected.
In this respect, current stance of the monetary policy take the Medium Term Program as given and thus assume that fiscal discipline will be maintained.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit will support the relative improvement of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term.
In April, consumer prices were up 1.52 percent and annual inflation increased to 11.14 percent.
This rise was led by energy prices that were pushed upwards by the increase in electricity and natural gas tariffs.
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators also increased amid the soaring clothing prices.
In this period, annual inflation in energy and services went up, while it remained unchanged in core goods group.
In food and nonalcoholic beverages group, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices maintained the mild outlook of the last three months.
As for the processed food group, annual inflation rose to 9.80 percent in April.
Indicators related to May suggest that annual unprocessed food inflation will display a sharp fall due to the base effect in fresh fruits prices; while processed food inflation will continue to increase slightly.
In energy group, the rise in natural gas and electricity tariffs in April pushed up annual consumer inflation by 0.51 percentage point as envisaged, while prices remained moderate in other energy items.
In May, the decline in fuel prices is expected to lower the annual rate of increase in energy prices.
On the services front, annual inflation went up by 0.56 percentage point to 6.73 percent in April, which was partially driven by the base effect in communication services.
Meanwhile, the rise in restaurants-hotels and transport services is also noticeable.
Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices suggest that the underlying trend of the prices of services edged up in this period.
As for the core goods group, annual inflation remained unchanged in April.
While annual inflation continued with its downward trend in durable goods, the uptrend in clothing and footwear accelerated due to the ongoing effects of the rise in import duties.
Accordingly, annual rate of increase in core inflation indicators posted an increase as well.
The Committee stated that the deceleration in economic activity continued in the first quarter of 2012, which was attributed to domestic demand.
Having plummeted in January, industrial production index picked up slightly in February and March; yet production stood below the figures of the previous quarter.
In the first quarter, domestic sales of vehicles posted a quarter-on-quarter decline.
Leading indicators suggest a modest recovery for the second quarter.
The Committee reiterated that the slowdown in economic activity in the early 2012 were driven by the tight policy measures besides some temporary factors such as adverse weather conditions and external uncertainties, and domestic demand would post an increase in the second quarter.
Nevertheless, it is stated that the recent deterioration in the global economic outlook and the risk appetite might lead to a slower-than-expected recovery in economic activity.
As a matter of fact, expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry firms exhibited a slight decline in the last two months.
In March, a remarkable recovery was seen in 12-month current account balance as envisaged.
Moreover, the recovery in the terms of trade also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
Accordingly, the current account deficit is expected to continue to decline gradually in the forthcoming period.
Employment followed a poor course in the first quarter amid the slowdown in economic activity.
The downward trend in the construction sector employment, which started in the last quarter of 2011 and halted in January, continued in February.
Moreover, the rate of increase in employment in the services sector recorded a marked loss of pace.
As for the industrial sector, the trend of recovery was maintained, which has been evident since December 2011.
While the leading indicators signal for a mild growth in employment in the short term, the ongoing downside risks on global economy may restrain employment growth in the period ahead.
The Committee noted that inflation will follow a volatile path in the short term.
Although inflation will display a marked drop in May, it is expected to stay significantly above the target until the last quarter of the year.
On the other hand, core inflation is expected to display a limited increase in the short term before starting to decline in the second half of the year.
According to the Committee members, the elevated levels of current inflation calls for a close monitoring of inflation expectations.
Accordingly, the current tight policy stance will be maintained in the forthcoming period in order to contain risks regarding pricing behavior.
The Committee therefore continues to forecast the year-end inflation to be at 6.5 percent stated in the April Inflation Report.
The Committee members indicated that the downward slope of the yield curve points to the tight monetary policy stance.
Moreover, moderate pace of consumer credit growth suggests that financial conditions are tight as well.
Although corporate loans recently display some acceleration, this can be mainly attributed to supply-sided temporary factors and seasonal effects, and hence seen as a temporary development.
Developments during May have once again demonstrated the fragile state of the global economy, highlighting the essential role of the current policy framework adopted by the Central Bank of Turkey.
The Committee stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy.
In this respect, shorter episodes of additional monetary tightening may also be implemented, when necessary.
Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved a limited increase in the flexibility regarding the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in foreign currency.
The Committee members stated that this flexibility will ease the Turkish lira and foreign exchange liquidity management of the banks and hence act as an automatic stabilizer against external finance shocks.
On the other hand, the Committee members stated that, in order to lower the gap between the cost of holding foreign exchange and Turkish lira reserves, it would be useful to require a higher fraction of foreign exchange per each unit of Turkish lira for additional increases in allowance ratios.
Accordingly, the upper limit of Turkish lira required reserves that can be held in foreign exchange and gold could be raised, if conditions permit, up to 60 percent and 30 percent gradually, with incremental increases in the fraction of foreign exchange or gold that can be held for each unit of required Turkish lira reserves.
In May, consumer prices were down 0.21 percent and annual inflation decreased to 8.28 percent.
This decline was led by the favorable course of unprocessed food prices besides falling energy prices in line with international economic developments.
Clothing prices stood as another factor to contribute to disinflation; and core inflation indicators went down in this period.
Annual rate of price increases in food and nonalcoholic beverages group plummeted due to the high base in unprocessed food prices.
Setting aside the base effect, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices maintained their mild course by displaying a month-on-month decline.
On the processed food front, the increasing trend was sustained, bringing the annual rate of increase to 10.29 percent.
Although June indicators suggest that monthly unprocessed food prices maintain the moderate outlook, the reversal of the base effect is expected to lead to a limited increase in consumer inflation.
Easing international commodity prices is having a favorable effect on inflation.
In fact, energy prices dropped by 1.9 percent in May.
Mostly driven by fuel prices, this trend is expected to continue in June.
On the services front, annual inflation went up to 6.92 percent in May.
This increase is attributed to the base effect in communication services besides the rise in prices of restaurants, hotels and transport services, as in the previous month.
Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices do not point to an increase in the underlying trend of the prices of services.
As for the core goods group, annual inflation went down to 8.42 percent.
While durable goods prices decreased by 0.65 percent, clothing and footwear prices, which soared in April, increased at a rate quite below the seasonal averages in May.
Although May inflation indicators reflect the related development in clothing prices, core inflation indicators excluding clothing prices also exhibited a downward trend.
In sum, mainly due to the developments in unprocessed food and energy prices, inflation followed a more favorable path compared to the projections in April Inflation Report.
Factor Affecting Inflation 7.
While domestic demand shows a significant slowdown in the first quarter, leading indicators suggest a modest recovery for the second quarter.
Both survey indicators and the credit data signal that consumption demand assumed a mild trend of growth following the slump in January.
In fact, having tumbled in January, industrial production index picked up within three consecutive months.
Nevertheless, due to the deterioration in the recent global growth outlook and the risk appetite, it was mentioned that the recovery in economic activity may be slower than expected in the second half of the year.
Problems in the euro area economies, primarily in the Greek and Spanish context, weigh on the perceptions of uncertainty.
Meanwhile, economic activity and labor market trends in the Chinese and US economies point to a weakening in the global growth outlook.
In line with these developments, expectations for orders of domestic manufacturing firms also trended downwards.
Exports continue to grow despite the weakening global outlook.
Decelerating domestic demand coupled with the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira continue to restrict the import demand and non- energy current account deficit.
Accordingly, the gradual decline in the current account deficit is expected to continue in the forthcoming period.
Employment followed a weak course amid the slowdown in economic activity in the first months of the year and the downtrend in unemployment rates paused.
Meanwhile, non-farm employment posted an increase in March period amid the mild recovery in economic activity, which was supported by all main sectors.
Trends in recent months suggest that the industrial employment continued to recover and services employment maintained its upward movement at a slowing pace, whereas construction employment remained weak.
Although leading indicators signal for a mild growth in employment in the short term, ongoing downside risks on the global economy may restrain employment growth in the period ahead.
The Committee has indicated that monetary policy framework adopted since end- 2010 has been quite effective in rebalancing the economy and reducing macro- financial risks.
This assessment is supported especially by the slowdown in consumer loan growth and the consequent improvement in the current account balance.
Moreover, the moderation in economic activity and the fall in commodity prices contribute to the ongoing rebalancing process.
Energy and unprocessed food prices follow a more favorable course than envisaged in the April Inflation Report, leading to a better inflation outlook.
In this respect, it was noted that the expected increase in inflation to be led by the base effect in June would be more limited than implied by earlier projections.
In addition, aggregate demand conditions support the downward trend in inflation in line with the weakening in global economic outlook.
Consequently, inflation is expected to stay below the path projected in the April Inflation Report in the forthcoming months.
However, pricing behavior should be closely monitored as inflation will continue to stay above the target for some time.
Although medium term inflation expectations are relatively stable, the Committee highlighted that year-end inflation expectations remain significantly above the target.
Therefore, additional monetary tightening may be implemented along the guidance presented in the April and May Committee meetings.
In this respect, it was reiterated that having the room for maneuver provided by the wide interest rate corridor coupled with the effective liquidity management is particularly important under current circumstances.
Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an additional increase in the flexibility regarding the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in foreign currency and gold.
The Committee members have underscored that these measures aimed at containing the adverse effects of the excessive volatility in capital flows on domestic markets.
Moreover, it was reminded that should eligible conditions arise, the upper limit for Turkish lira required reserves that can be held in foreign exchange and gold could be raised up to 60 percent and 30 percent gradually with incremental increases in the fraction of foreign exchange or gold that can be held for each unit of required Turkish lira reserves.
Although annual growth rate of tax revenues declined due to the slowdown in economic activity in the first half of the year, primary expenditures has largely been under control.
Current stance of the monetary policy takes the Medium Term Program as given and thus assumes that fiscal discipline will be maintained.
Besides, the projections presented in the April Inflation Report are based on the assumption that there will be no marked increase in administered prices for the rest of the year.
In this respect, steps to be taken for the implementation of structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remain to be of utmost importance.
In June, consumer prices were down 0.90 percent, while annual inflation increased to 8.87 percent.
As also indicated in the previous Summary of the .
Committee Meeting, the favorable course of energy and unprocessed food prices contained the base-effect-driven rise in inflation.
Meanwhile, the annual rate of increase of core inflation indicators went down.
In June, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices posted a decline and maintained their mild course.
However, annual rate of price increase in food and nonalcoholic beverages group went up to 7.38 percent due to the base effect.
Leading indicators for July suggest that unprocessed food prices will rise due to the developments in the prices of fresh fruit.
On the processed food front, being mainly driven by prices of bread and cereals, oils and fats, the increasing trend was sustained.
The cumulative increase especially in bread prices totaled nearly 8 percent in the first six months, which was led by the arrangements in the Communique on Bread and Bread Varieties of the Turkish Food Codex.
These effects may continue have an adverse impact on processed food prices in the short term.
Energy prices continued to decline in June parallel to easing domestic fuel prices.
Although developments in the first half of July indicate that the decline in energy prices continue, the upward trend in international oil prices as of the end of June poses a risk to inflation in the short term.
On the services front, annual inflation remained unchanged month-on-month at 6.94 percent in June.
Annual inflation decreased in transport services, while it increased in communication services and rents.
Although diffusion index edged up in this period, seasonally adjusted price data indicated a flat course in the underlying trend of the prices of services.
As for the core goods group, annual inflation maintained its downward trend with 7.93 percent.
While annual inflation in durable goods and clothing went down in this period, other core goods items posted increases.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the underlying trend of core goods inflation slowed down remarkably at the end of the second quarter.
These developments led the underlying trend of core inflation indicators to continue to go down.
In sum, mainly due to the developments in food and energy prices, mid-year inflation was lower than projected in the April Inflation Report.
National accounts data for the first quarter of 2012 suggest that economic activity remained consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
While domestic demand posted a mild increase in this period, net foreign demand made a larger-than-expected contribution to annual growth.
In other words, the rebalancing process in the economy continued with a stronger pace.
While national income posted a quarterly decline in the first quarter, it was reiterated that this slowdown reflected temporary factors.
Second-quarter indicators confirmed that the negative course in the first quarter did not tend to be persistent and that the economy would return to a mild growth path in the subsequent period.
In fact, industrial production recorded a strong growth in the April-May period compared to the previous quarter.
Committee (the Committee) members assessed that this also entailed a compensation for the unfavorable outturn in the first quarter and therefore the underlying trend in the economic activity followed a mild course despite the brisk recovery.
The Committee noted that signals for a slowdown in the economy, which gradually spread across the globe in the May-June period, posed downside risks to the foreign demand outlook pertaining to the second half of the year.
Problems in the European economies, primarily in the Greek and Spanish context, weigh on the perceptions of uncertainty.
Meanwhile, economic activity and labor market trends in the Chinese and US economies exhibited poor figures for the global growth outlook.
Despite global economic problems, exports entailed a stronger underlying trend compared to the pre-crisis period.
The Committee stated that this could be attributed to the lagged effects of rebalancing policies besides market diversification in foreign markets.
In fact, the rebalancing process continued in the second quarter, which bolstered economic fundamentals and perceptions regarding the Turkish economy.
Despite a slight deterioration in expectations for orders in the manufacturing industry and the retail sector, indicators for medium/long term expectations like employment, investment plans and consumer confidence point to a comparatively more favorable outlook.
Amid the mild recovery in economic activity, non-farm employment declined again in the April period.
Trends in recent months suggest that the industrial employment recovered further and services employment lost momentum.
Having boosted in April, the construction employment largely compensated for the plunge in February.
According to the Committee members, recent data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged.
Domestic demand displays a modest recovery as expected, while exports continue to grow despite the weakening global outlook.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions support disinflation and current account balance continues to improve gradually.
The meeting also involved an assessment of the inflation forecast prepared for the July Inflation Report.
The Committee has indicated that the year-end inflation forecast is likely to be revised slightly downwards due to recent favorable developments in factors affecting inflation.
However, it was stated that pricing behavior should be closely monitored as inflation will continue to stay above the target for some time.
Although the monetary tightening implemented since last October and the moderate aggregate demand outlook reduce the likelihood of second round effects, pricing behavior will be monitored closely in the forthcoming period.
Ongoing uncertainty regarding the global economy requires the maintenance of a flexible approach in monetary policy.
The perception that leading central banks will keep interest rates at low levels for a prolonged period encourages the search for yield.
On the other hand, despite the steps taken for the resolution of problems regarding the Euro Area, risk appetite remains highly sensitive to news due to ongoing fragilities in the financial system, elevated levels of sovereign borrowing costs and weakening growth outlook.
Therefore, it is highly likely that short term capital inflows will continue to be volatile in the forthcoming period.
In this respect, also considering the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, the Committee has stated that it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy.
The impact of the measures undertaken on credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
Moreover, in order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an additional increase in the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in foreign currency.
Accordingly, the upper limit for the FX reserves that can be held to fulfill Turkish lira reserve requirements has been raised from 50 percent to 55 percent, with a multiplier of 1.9 for the additional 5 percent tranche.
The Committee members have reiterated that this mechanism is designed to contain the adverse effects of the excessive volatility in capital flows on domestic markets.
The Committee has also assessed the risk scenarios that could have an impact on inflation and monetary policy outlook and possible policy reactions.
According to the Committee members, a further weakening in global economic outlook may prompt central banks of developed economies to implement additional monetary easing.
Such an event would feed into macro financial risks for emerging economies like Turkey.
A resurge in short term capital inflows may slowdown the rebalancing process through rapid credit growth and appreciation pressures on domestic currency.
Should such a risk materialize, the Central Bank may keep short-term rates at low levels while tightening through reserve requirements, utilizing the mechanism it has developed for reserve requirements by increasing the coefficients which define the amount of foreign exchange to be held per unit of Turkish lira reserve requirements.
It is also likely that problems in the Euro Area may further intensify, given the ongoing deleveraging process in banking, household and public sector balance sheets and possible delays in the institutional mechanisms to resolve the related problems.
Should such a risk materialize, the immediate reaction could be to implement an active liquidity policy via the interest rate corridor; to be followed by measures to relieve the tension in the banking system through the use of reserve requirements as well as other liquidity instruments.
On the other hand, aggregate demand and commodity prices may increase faster than expected, should the measures taken towards the solution of problems regarding the global economy are completed sooner and more decisively than envisaged.
Materialization of such a risk would possibly require a tightening using all policy instruments, as it would mean increased pressures on the medium-term inflation outlook.
Another risk for the forthcoming period is the uncertainty regarding the commodity prices.
Although weak global outlook dampens the upside pressures on commodity prices, prevailing geopolitical and supply-side problems pose upside risks regarding energy prices in the short term.
Moreover, the recent rapid increase in agricultural commodity prices pose risks regarding processed food prices.
Should such risks materialize, the Committee will not respond to temporary price movements, yet will not tolerate any permanent deterioration in expectations and pricing behavior.
Unprocessed food prices pose downside risks for the inflation outlook in 2012, as indicated in the April Inflation Report.
The revised forecast adopts a rather cautious approach, assuming a reversal in the favorable trend observed during the first half of the year.
End-year inflation may be lower than projected in the baseline scenario presented in the new Inflation Report, should the unprocessed food prices display a more favorable course than expected.
Current monetary policy stance takes the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
In this respect, it is assumed that there will be no additional deterioration in the budget balance in the second half of the year as well as no unforeseen hikes in administered prices.
A revision in the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework and have a consequent adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
Maintaining the prudent fiscal policy implemented in recent years is crucial for preserving the resilience of our economy against existing global uncertainties.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit, would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term.
This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and contribute to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long- term government securities at low levels.
In July, consumer prices were down 0.23 percent, while annual inflation increased to 9.07 percent mainly owing to the rise in unprocessed food prices.
In this period, the underlying trend of core goods inflation maintained its downward course upon the alleviation of cost-side pressures, while the services inflation remained moderate.
On the food and beverages front, annual inflation reached 9.06 percent.
This is attributed to the rise in seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices as well as the base effect of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Processed food prices increased principally due to the prices of bread and cereals, while the group’s annual inflation went down in July.
The recent increase in international agricultural prices, chiefly in wheat, constitutes an upside risk on processed food prices for the rest of the year.
Energy prices continued to fall in July as they did in the last two months.
Nevertheless, international oil prices, which have recently trended upwards, led energy prices to increase in August.
On the services front, annual inflation has remained unchanged for the last three months.
Annual inflation increased in transport services, while it edged down in restaurants and hotels group in July.
Seasonally adjusted indicators and the diffusion index data indicate a slight slowdown in the underlying trend of the services inflation.
As for the core goods group, annual inflation increased slightly to 8.11 percent.
While annual inflation in durable goods maintained its downward trend, other core good items posted increases in this period.
However, seasonally adjusted data suggest that the deceleration in the underlying trend of core goods inflation continues.
Furthermore, in this period, all diffusion indices have exhibited a downward movement.
Against this background, the downward movement in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators has been sustained.
National accounts data for the second quarter of 2012 suggest that domestic demand and economic activity displayed a mild increase.
This period witnessed a rise in the domestic sales of automobiles and commercial vehicles, and a modest growth in loans.
Despite the decline in June, the industrial production index posted a quarterly increase upon the rises in the April-May period.
Recent data releases point that the economic activity keeps mild growth trend in the third quarter.
Three-month ahead expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry firms edged up in July, and the downward trend in the capacity utilization rate, which has been persistent since March, came to a halt.
On the other hand, domestic sales, confidence indices and the investment tendency data in the manufacturing industry point out the risk of a weaker-than-envisaged recovery in the economic activity during the third quarter.
Despite global economic problems, exports excluding gold have displayed a stronger upward trend since the second half of 2011.
Committee (the Committee) stated that this could be attributed to the cumulative effects of rebalancing policies besides market and product diversification in foreign markets.
On the other hand, imports have recorded an annual decline amid the deceleration in credit growth and the relative price movements.
Accordingly, 12-month cumulative current account deficit continues to narrow down gradually.
The mild recovery in the economic activity is reflected on the non-farm employment rate as well.
Despite the increase in employment in May, non-farm employment rate followed a flat course upon the rise in employment participation rate.
Industrial employment, which has recently increased, edged down in May.
On the other hand, with the support of construction and services sectors, non- farm employment recorded an increase.
Although leading indicators signal for a mild deceleration in industrial employment in the short term, job vacancy data do not display an unfavorable outlook.
Furthermore, ongoing downside risks on the global economy remain to be critical factors to restrain investment and employment growth in the period ahead.
Domestic demand displays a modest recovery, while exports continue to grow despite the weakening global growth outlook.
The Committee expects inflation to follow a downward course in the forthcoming period as indicated in July Inflation Report.
Core inflation indicators are also expected to follow a downward trend.
Although, aggregate demand conditions contain the second round effects, pricing behavior should be closely monitored as inflation will continue to stay above the target for some time.
In order to support financial stability, the Committee has approved an additional increase in the allowance to hold Turkish lira reserve requirements in foreign currency and gold.
Accordingly, the upper limit for the fraction of FX and gold reserves that can be held to fulfill Turkish lira reserve requirements has been raised by 5 percentage points to 60 and 30 percent, respectively.
The coefficient regarding the option to hold FX or gold (reserve option coefficient-ROC) for each additional 5 percent tranche was set as “2”.
Moreover, the ROC for FX for the first tranche was increased by 0.1 percentage points to 1.1.
The Committee has reiterated that this mechanism aims to contain the adverse effects of the excessive volatility in capital flows on domestic markets.
It was indicated that the coefficients may be revised accordingly, as needed.
In light of these developments, the Committee has indicated that interest rate corridor may be narrowed gradually in the forthcoming period.
The Committee has indicated that uncertainties regarding global economy persist.
On the other hand, despite the steps taken for the resolution of problems regarding the Euro Area, risk appetite remains highly sensitive to news due to ongoing fragilities in the financial system, elevated levels of sovereign borrowing costs, and weakening growth outlook.
The Committee has stated that, given the prevailing uncertainties regarding the global economy, it would be appropriate to preserve the flexibility of the monetary policy on both sides.
The Committee stated that a further weakening in global economic outlook may prompt central banks of developed economies to implement additional monetary easing.
A resurge in short-term capital inflows may slowdown the rebalancing process through rapid credit growth and appreciation pressures on domestic currency.
Should such a risk materialize, the Central Bank may keep short-term rates at low levels while tightening via reserve requirements and may actively utilize the mechanism it has developed for reserve requirements through an increase in ROC.
End-year inflation may be lower than projected in the baseline scenario presented in the Inflation Report, should the unprocessed food prices display a more favorable course than expected.
Continuing the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit, would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term.
In August, consumer prices were up by 0.56 percent, while annual inflation decreased to 8.88 percent mainly owing to core goods prices.
In this period, the underlying trend of core goods inflation maintained its downward course upon the alleviation of cost and demand-side pressures, while the services inflation maintained its moderate course.
On the food and beverages front, annual inflation remained flat with 9.14 percent.
As for the unprocessed and processed food groups, annual inflation increased in the former, and decreased in the latter.
Seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices recorded an increase in August as they did in July.
In this period, not only the prices of fruits and vegetables, but also meat and milk prices went up.
Leading indicators suggest that the rise in unprocessed food prices has continued in September as well due to the price developments in fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the processed food front, bread and cereals saw price hikes.
However, the annual rate of increase in processed food prices declined in August owing to the relatively mild course in other processed food prices.
Despite the halt in the trend of price increases in international markets, the high level of wheat prices poses a risk on processed food prices; yet it is projected that the deceleration in processed food inflation will continue in the forthcoming period.
Amid the developments in oil prices, energy prices soared by 2.29 percent in August parallel to the rise in fuel and bottled gas prices.
On the services front, annual inflation has remained flat as it did in the last three months.
Annual inflation declined in transport services, but increased in rents in this period.
Seasonally adjusted price and diffusion indices point that the underlying trend of the prices of services maintained its mild course.
As for the core goods group, annual inflation decreased by 0.7 percentage points to 7.41 percent.
This decline prevailed among all subcategories of core goods.
Particularly, the cumulative increase in durable consumption goods prices since the beginning of the year has remained limited, which is worth noting.
Against this background, the .
Committee (the Committee) assessed that the decline in inflation might be subject to a temporary halt in September; but the downward trend in inflation will resume afterwards at a faster pace.
As for the core inflation, a gradual decline is foreseen to continue.
Economic activity posted a remarkable increase in the second quarter of 2012 compared to the previous quarter in consistency with the outlook presented with the July Inflation Report.
Meanwhile, the Committee underlined that this increase was mainly driven by the compensation of temporary factors like adverse weather conditions that decelerated the economic activity; and therefore the trend in economic activity manifested itself as a mild growth.
Moreover, it was reiterated that the increased contribution of net external demand to growth reflects the impact of the policies implemented since late 2010 on the rebalancing process.
Final domestic demand has continued with a modest pace in the third quarter.
Production and imports of consumption goods in July went above the average of the previous quarter.
Automobile sales and consumption indices pointed to increases, while sales of white goods posted a decline.
Machinery-equipment production and sales of heavy commercial vehicles exhibited a weaker outlook in investment demand compared to consumption.
Production indicators confirm the mild outlook in the economic activity.
Seasonally-adjusted industrial production in July has largely compensated for the decline in June.
Three-month ahead expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry firms increased in August as they did in July, while the capacity utilization rate remained flat.
On the other hand, the Committee stated that the deceleration in consumer and investor confidence and the investment tendency data posed a downside risk on the economic activity.
The rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged.
Imports have recorded a decline amid the mild credit growth and relative price movements, while exports continue to increase despite the weakening global outlook.
Overall, 12-month cumulative current account deficit continues to improve gradually.
In June, unemployment rate went down on account of the rise in non-farm employment.
Non-farm employment rise was driven by services and construction sectors, while industrial employment remained flat in this period.
Leading indicators for industrial employment signal for a deceleration in the pace of employment rate in the third quarter.
Other indicators of the labor market suggest a slight slowdown in the pace of employment in the July-August period.
The Committee assessed that parallel to the moderate increase in economic activity, the rise in employment would also follow a mild course.
Furthermore, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may restrain investment and employment growth in the period ahead.
In light of these developments, the Committee indicated that aggregate demand conditions support disinflation.
Moreover, easing cost pressures, as observed in the moderate course of manufacturing prices, have been contributing positively to the core inflation dynamics.
Accordingly, also taking account the base effects from the previous year, the fall in inflation is expected to become more evident during the last quarter of the year.
Yet, the Committee underscored that, given the recent increases in energy prices and given that inflation will continue to stay above the target for some time, a cautious stance regarding pricing behavior is warranted.
The Committee indicated that the scenario presented in the Inflation Report on “additional monetary easing by the central banks of developed economies” has been partly realized.
In fact, recent developments have led to an improvement in the risk appetite in global financial markets.
The Committee stated that this development has the potential to lead to an acceleration of capital inflows.
Therefore, increasing the reserve option coefficients and narrowing the interest rate corridor would support financial stability.
Moreover, it was indicated that a measured step in the same direction may be taken in the forthcoming period, if deemed necessary.
In terms of smoothing the volatility in domestic markets caused by the capital flows, reserve option mechanism reduces the need for the interest rate corridor.
On the other hand, the Committee reminded that interest rate corridor has other functions both for the transmission of credit channel and for efficient liquidity management.
Therefore, it was stated that interest rate corridor will be continue to be used as an active policy instrument.
Although the risk appetite has improved in financial markets due to recent developments, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible on both sides.
Current monetary policy stance is based on the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and the adjustments in administered prices will be consistent with inflation targets.
Continuing the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the saving deficit, would support the relative improvement of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium term.
In September, consumer prices were up by 1.03 percent and annual inflation climbed to 9.19 percent mainly owing to energy and unprocessed food prices.
Core inflation indicators remained on a favorable track.
Effects of the hikes in administered prices and tax adjustments were partially seen in September, whereas, the greater part thereof will be evident in October.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went up to 10.39 percent.
Despite pacing down, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices continued to rise in September, pushing the group’s annual inflation upwards.
However, leading indicators point out that in October annual unprocessed food inflation will plummet due to vegetable prices.
As for the processed food group, bread and cereals group prices registered increases, and the rise in wheat prices also reflected on other cereals excluding bread as well.
Owing to the base effect, annual processed food inflation continued to taper off in this period; while leading indicators suggest that the trend of high-rated monthly increase in processed food prices may continue in October as well.
Energy prices went up by 2.43 percent in September parallel to the rise in fuel and bottled gas prices, which was due to soaring oil prices.
This upsurge was also attributed to the raised amount of lump sum special consumption tax on fueloil.
However, as the tax arrangement was enforced on September 22, the greater part of the mentioned effect on inflation will be seen in October inflation.
Energy prices will soar in October due to the adjustment in natural gas and electricity tariffs as well.
These hikes and tax arrangements are projected to have a direct effect of 0.8 percentage points on annual inflation in October.
On the services front, annual inflation has been flat since May.
Annual inflation increased in restaurant-hotel and communication services, yet declined in transport services and rents in September.
Upon the arrangement introduced to university tuition rates, prices of education services posted a monthly decline by 1.19 percent in this period.
In September, the diffusion index of the prices of services edged up; however the underlying trend of seasonally-adjusted prices remained on a mild track.
Annual inflation in core goods group fell by 1 percentage point in September.
Annual inflation in all core goods excluding the clothing group recorded decreases.
The decline particularly in durable goods inflation is worth noting.
As a result, parallel to the support given by aggregate demand conditions to inflation and the favorable course of cost factors, the slowdown in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators continued.
The favorable course of unprocessed food prices compared to past years will also bolster the downtrend in annual inflation in the short term.
Committee (the Committee) expects the fall in inflation to become more evident during the last quarter of the year.
Final domestic demand follows a moderate pace.
The sharp fall in industrial production in August can be attributed to sector-specific day-offs other than official holidays in some manufacturing sectors.
In this context, the Committee assessed that the August production data are consistent with the mild growth outlook.
Recent data releases point to a modest rise in economic activity in the third quarter.
Sales of automobile and light commercial vehicles posted a pronounced increase in the third quarter, while those of heavy commercial vehicles exhibited a weaker quarterly outlook despite the increase in September.
Sales of white goods displayed a virtually flat course, whereas CNBC-e consumption index suggests a limited rise on a quarterly basis.
Driven both by domestic and external market orders, three-month ahead expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry firms have increased for the last three months, while the capacity utilization rate remained flat.
On the other hand, the Committee stated that the deceleration in consumer and investor confidence and the investment tendency data in the third quarter posed a downside risk on the economic activity.
While imports continue to decline on an annual basis upon relative price movements besides the slowdown in credit growth, exports continue to increase despite the weakening global outlook.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions support disinflation and 12-month cumulative current account deficit continues to decline gradually.
Unemployment rate went up due to the decline in non-farm employment in July, which is attributed to the construction and services sectors.
Having exhibited a poor outlook since the April period, employment in the industrial sector remained flat in this period as well.
Leading indicators for the industrial employment signal for a deceleration in the pace of employment in the third quarter, while other indicators for the labor market point to a stable outlook in general, albeit a slight deterioration in the August-September period.
Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may restrain the rise in employment.
The Committee has stated that increasing the reserve option coefficients and narrowing the interest rate corridor by a measured amount would support financial stability.
If deemed necessary, a measured step in the same direction may be taken in the forthcoming period.
The meeting also included an assessment of inflation forecasts to prepared for the Inflation Report.
The Committee expects the fall in inflation to become more evident during the last quarter of the year.
However, a cautious stance regarding pricing behavior is warranted given that inflation will stay above the target rate for some time due to recent increases in administered and energy prices.
Although the risk appetite has improved due to recent developments in financial markets, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible on both sides.
Uncertainties persist regarding the deleveraging in public, household, and bank balance sheets.
The protracted nature of the global recovery has been prompting the extension of quantitative easing packages across advances economies.
Despite the steps taken for the resolution of problems regarding the Euro Area, risk appetite remains highly sensitive to any new developments due to ongoing fragilities in the financial system, elevated levels of sovereign borrowing costs across peripheral economies, and weakening growth outlook.
Under these conditions, it is important to preserve the flexibility of monetary policy in either direction.
Measures taken by the advanced economies during the third quarter of 2012 have eased the tail risks and alleviated the fluctuations in the global financial system.
However, there are still uncertainties regarding the implementation of policy measures.
It should be noted that the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey has adequate tools at its disposal to use as needed under this uncertain environment.
A prolonged weakness in global economic growth may prompt central banks of developed economies to sustain their monetary easing packages.
Extension of the duration of new packages would feed into macro financial risks for emerging economies like Turkey.
In such a case a resurge in short term capital inflows may slow down the rebalancing process through rapid credit growth and appreciation pressures on domestic currency.
Should such a risk materialize, the Committee may keep short-term rates at low levels while tightening through macroprudential tools such as reserve requirements.
Moreover, the automatic stabilizer nature of the Reserve Option Mechanism will support financial stability.
Quantitative easing policies by advanced economies also pose risks regarding commodity prices.
However, upside risks on inflation could be contained under such a case, as periods of quantitative easing typically coincide with a weakening in the global economy.
However, the Committee will take the necessary tightening measures, should the increase in commodity prices prove persistent and consequently lead to a deterioration in the pricing behavior.
On the other hand, aggregate demand and commodity prices may increase faster than expected, should the measures taken towards the solution of problems regarding the global economy be completed sooner and more decisively than envisaged.
Unprocessed food price developments may lead to a more favorable inflation outlook at the end of 2012 than predicted.
Despite the favorable course of leading indicators, a rather cautious approach was adopted, assuming that the rate of increase in unprocessed food prices will be close to the past years’ average.
Year-end inflation may be lower than projected in the baseline scenario of the October Inflation Report, should unprocessed food prices display a more favorable course than envisaged.
Forecasts presented in the baseline scenario take the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
In this respect, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
Prudent fiscal policy is crucial for preserving the resilience of our economy against existing global uncertainties.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit would support the relative improvement of Turkey’s sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium-term.
In October, consumer prices were up by 1.96 percent and annual inflation went down to 7.80 percent mainly owing to unprocessed food prices.
Core inflation indicators continued with a downward course amid cost and demand-side developments, while prices of services remained mild.
Hikes in the SCT (Special Consumption Tax) rates besides natural gas and electricity tariffs are estimated to add around 1 to 1.1 percentage points to the annual inflation.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went down to 7.87 percent.
Following the upward trend in the third quarter, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices displayed a decline in October.
Due to flat course of vegetable prices, which soared in October in past years, annual unprocessed food inflation decreased by 5.5 percentage points to 5.35 percent.
Leading indicators point that annual unprocessed food inflation will fall notably in November as well.
As for the processed foods, bread and cereals group prices continued to register increases, amid rising wheat prices.
Processed food prices excluding breads and cereals also accelerated in October.
Consequently, a rise in annual processed food inflation is registered.
Hikes in the natural gas and electricity tariffs coupled with tax adjustments in fuel oil led the annual energy inflation to climb to 15 percent.
On the services front, annual inflation edged up in October.
This rise was driven by the increases in the prices of communication services.
In the services group excluding communication, annual inflation decreased in October as it did in September.
In October, the underlying trend of seasonally-adjusted prices remained on a mild track, while the diffusion index of the prices of services continued to increase.
Annual inflation in core goods group fell by 1.32 percentage points to 5.1 percent in October.
This decline was apparent in all the main sectors of core goods, and particularly in durable goods.
Seasonally adjusted data show that the slowdown in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators continued.
Economic activity followed a moderate pace in the third quarter.
A sizeable increase was seen in industrial production in September, yet it was attributed to the compensation of the decline led by the divergence in the official and actual numbers of the days-off in August.
In fact, the third-quarter average of the industrial production index increased modestly quarter on quarter.
Recent data releases point that economic activity will be stronger in the final quarter compared to the previous quarter.
Although sales of automobiles declined on an annual basis in October, they remained above the average of the third quarter.
Three-month-ahead expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry firms continued to increase owing to both domestic and external orders.
PMI data also displayed a similar trend.
Investment tendency still follows a relatively weak course, albeit an increase recently after an extended period.
Committee (Committee) stated that confidence indices are yet to improve and the uncertainties in external financial markets may put a cap on the economic activity.
The latest data confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged.
While imports declined in the third quarter upon the slowdown in credit growth besides the relative price movements, exports continue to increase despite the weakening global outlook.
Overall, 12-month cumulative current account deficit continues to decline gradually.
On the other hand, the Committee highlighted that the rebalancing process may lose pace due to the pick-up in domestic demand in the last quarter of the year.
Employment rate displayed a mild increase on account of the slowdown in economic activity.
Despite the rise in non-farm employment in August, there was a limited increase in the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate, owing to an increase in the participation rate.
The rise in the non-farm employment rate is attributed to the construction and services sectors.
Having exhibited a limited trend of decline since the March period, employment in the industrial sector declined further in August.
Despite the recent rise in PMI employment index and industrial production, other leading indicators for the industrial employment signal that employment growth may be limited in the forthcoming period.
Moreover, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may restrain the employment growth.
During the meeting, the Committee assessed the developments regarding price stability and financial stability.
In terms of inflation the main variables of interest were aggregate demand outlook, output gap indicators, and cost factors.
With regard to macro financial risks, the focus was on credit, current account balance, and real exchange rate developments.
According to the Committee, demand side indicators support the downward trend in inflation.
Aggregate demand growth has slowed down markedly in the third quarter, mainly driven by developments in final private domestic demand.
Although domestic demand shows some recovery for the final quarter of the year, aggregate demand conditions are still expected to support disinflation.
The Committee assessed that cost factors have been contributing to the disinflation as well.
With the recent stable course of exchange rates and commodity prices, the accumulated pass-through effects of cost-push factors observed in 2011 have been fading away.
Accordingly, core goods inflation has been falling markedly since the beginning of the year.
Meanwhile, the underlying trend of services inflation has displayed a benign course.
Taking these assessments into account, the Committee expects that year-end inflation will be lower than the forecast presented at the October Inflation Report, owing to the favorable course of unprocessed food prices.
However, indirect effects of recent increases in administered and energy prices are closely monitored in terms of medium term inflation outlook.
The Committee stated that, as of the third quarter rebalancing in the composition of aggregate demand and thus the improvement in the current account balance continues, and credit volumes keep growing at reasonable rates consistent with the financial stability objectives.
On the other hand, it was indicated that the steady real appreciation trend in domestic currency observed since the beginning of the year should be closely monitored.
The Committee reminded that, under the current regime, there is no commitment regarding the level of the exchange rate; yet, in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability, it is important to take measures against excessive deviations from economic fundamentals, as needed.
The Committee attributes special emphasis on credit developments under the new policy framework.
Given the weak outlook for global demand, keeping the rate of credit growth at moderate levels is especially important for ensuring that both the level and the composition of the aggregate demand move towards desired direction.
In this context, it was underlined that credit growth rates not exceeding 15 percent annually would support both the price and financial stability.
The Committee stated that improved risk appetite towards Turkish economy provided room for a limited hike in reserve option coefficients.
It was indicated that both the improved risk appetite and the adoption of reserve option mechanism have eased the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
Moreover, the moderate pace of commercial loan growth has allowed for a measured cut in the upper bound of the corridor.
The Committee has therefore stated that increasing the reserve option coefficients and narrowing the interest rate corridor by a measured amount would support financial stability.
The Committee indicated that ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.
In light of these assessments it was stated that, if deemed necessary for financial stability, a measured cut may be considered in the policy rate and the overnight borrowing rate in the forthcoming period.
Current projections for price stability and financial stability outlook take the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
In this respect, it is assumed that in the forthcoming period fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit would support the relative improvement of Turkey's sovereign risk, and thus facilitate price stability and financial stability in the medium-term.
In November, consumer prices were up by 0.38 percent and annual inflation went down to 6.37 percent mainly owing to unprocessed food prices.
Core inflation indicators continued with a downward course amid cost and demand-side developments, while the prices of services remained mild.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went down by 3.5 percentage points to 4.32 percent.
Following an upward trend in the third quarter, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices displayed a sharp decline in the last two months owing to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Leading indicators point that annual unprocessed food inflation will fall in December as well.
As for the processed food group, bread and cereals group prices continued to register increases, amid rising wheat prices.
Processed food prices excluding breads and cereals also accelerated in the last two months.
Nevertheless, annual processed food inflation went down to 9.13 percent upon the base effect.
As for the energy group, annual inflation remains high with 14.5 percent, notwithstanding a slight fall in November.
On the services front, annual inflation remained at 7 percent.
In November, communication services and rents saw increases; while transport and other services recorded a decline in annual inflation.
Both the underlying trend of seasonally-adjusted prices and the diffusion index of the prices of services remained on a mild track.
Annual inflation in core goods group maintains its decelerating trend.
In contrast to the fall in other subgroups, annual inflation went up in the clothing group in November.
Having posted an evident fall, prices in durable goods went back to the levels of 2011.
Seasonally adjusted data show that the relative slow pace in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators continued.
Consequently, the Committee (the .
Committee) projects that the decline in inflation will continue in the short term with the support of favorable unprocessed food prices.
The GDP data regarding the third quarter of 2012 confirmed that economic activity followed a moderate course, albeit at a slower pace.
Final domestic demand edged down upon the plunge in private investment demand.
On the other hand, while exports of goods and services maintained an upward trend, import demand fell, and accordingly net exports remained as the main contributor to growth.
When the fall in the final domestic demand is jointly evaluated with the rise in export demand, a sustained balancing process in the economy is apparent.
The Committee assessed that the industrial production index recorded a month- on-month decline in October, yet this did not completely reflect the underlying trend of economic activity in the last quarter.
This relies on the fact that the divergence in the official and actual numbers of the days-off leads to a fluctuating course in production.
Moreover, increases in the expectations for orders of the manufacturing industry besides the PMI entail positive signals for the course of economic activity in the upcoming period.
Confidence indices and loan growth also support this outlook.
Recently released data suggest that despite the weakening global growth, exports continue to increase on the back of market and product diversification.
Imports, on the other hand, are expected to slightly accelerate in the forthcoming months due to the rise in domestic demand.
However, the Committee estimates that the improvement in the 12-month cumulative current account deficit will continue, albeit at a slower pace.
Seasonally adjusted aggregate and non-farm unemployment rate displayed an increase in September 2012 compared to the previous period.
Growth in labor participation rates overshot employment in this period, which led to a rise in unemployment rates.
Non-farm employment rate increased due to the construction and services sectors, while employment in the industrial sector continued to decline.
Having decreased beyond expectations in October, industrial production is estimated to increase significantly in November.
Furthermore, the employment expectation data in the Business Tendency Survey and the PMI employment stand at an optimistic level in November.
Other leading indicators signal that mild increases in non-farm employment will continue.
However, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may restrain the employment growth.
Recent data show that both the level and composition of aggregate demand evolves in line with expectations.
Domestic demand follows a moderate pace while exports continue to increase despite weakening global activity.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions support disinflation and current account deficit continues to decline gradually.
The Committee expects economic activity to follow a stronger course starting from the last quarter of the year.
In fact, confidence indices and credit growth show a marked increase, supported by the accommodative liquidity policies implemented by the Central Bank since mid-year and the relative improvement in the risk appetite.
Therefore, the contribution of domestic demand to economic growth is expected to increase in the forthcoming period.
However, the Committee has underscored that, credit volume and domestic demand should continue to grow at a sustainable pace in order to preserve price stability and financial stability.
Therefore, the impact of the recent significant fall in market interest rates on domestic demand and credit volumes will be monitored closely.
The Committee expects that year-end inflation will be significantly lower than the forecast presented in the October Inflation Report, owing to the favorable course of unprocessed food prices.
Core inflation indicators are also expected to follow a downward trend in the short-term owing to cost and demand factors.
Moreover, inflation expectations display an improving trend.
However, indirect effects of recent increases in administered and energy prices are closely monitored in terms of the medium term inflation outlook.
The Committee has stated that, in order to contain the risks on financial stability in the face of accelerating capital inflows, the proper policy would be to keep interest rates at low levels while continuing with macroprudential measures.
Accordingly, the Committee has indicated that, in order to support financial stability, it would be appropriate to take additional steps using reserve requirements, while delivering a limited cut in the policy rate.
In this respect, it was assessed that measured hikes in reserve requirements for foreign currency and in reserve option coefficients for gold would be useful.
In the following period, if deemed necessary for financial stability, a measured adjustment in the interest rate corridor might also be considered.
Although, risk perceptions towards Turkey have improved in recent months, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.
In December, consumer prices were up by 0.38 percent and annual inflation went down to 6.16 percent.
Thus, the year-end CPI inflation hit the lowest level of the last 44 years.
Unprocessed food prices continued to support the decline in annual consumer inflation.
Core inflation indicators remained mild amid cost and demand-side developments.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, year-end annual inflation was 3.90 percent, which was significantly lower than past year averages.
This was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which went down to -2.78 percent upon falling vegetable prices.
Leading indicators point that the favorable trend in unprocessed food prices will reverse in January and the group’s annual inflation will register notable increases.
As for the processed food group, parallel to the uptrend in domestic wheat prices, bread and cereals group maintains rising prices; whereas annual inflation in items excluding breads and cereals continues to decelerate.
Annual services inflation remained at 7 percent.
Across subcategories, communication services and rents registered rising inflation rates.
However, recording the lowest last-quarter-rise of recent years, restaurants-hotels and transport services exhibited a decline in annual inflation.
Both the seasonally- adjusted underlying trend and the diffusion index of the prices of services edged down and pointed that prices of services remained on a mild track.
Annual inflation in core goods group followed a flat course compared to the previous month and completed the year with 4.5 percent.
The main driver of the deceleration in core goods inflation across the year was durable goods prices, which went up merely by 0.17 percent in 2012.
In the forthcoming period, core goods inflation is expected to maintain its decelerating trend due to the prices of clothing and other core goods, which are core goods excluding durables.
Seasonally adjusted data show that the relatively mild pace in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators continued despite the rise in December.
Overall, the Committee has indicated that inflation may increase slightly in January due to adjustments in tobacco prices, but will resume its downward trend afterwards.
Core inflation indicators are expected to continue their downward trend.
Data regarding the fourth quarter of 2012 indicated that economic activity is in a trend of recovery.
Increase in industrial production partially compensated for the decline in October and production remained above the third-quarter level in the October- November period.
The Committee highlighted that annual growth rates continue to display notable fluctuations.
In fact, industrial production, which recorded two- digit increases in November on an annual basis, is expected to exhibit a rather minor change in December on an annual basis.
Meanwhile, leading indicators point that production will increasingly get stronger in the forthcoming period.
Data on production, imports and surveys regarding investment demand, which have been one of the main drivers of the weak course of the final domestic demand recently, signal for a recovery.
Data related to consumption demand indicate a mild increase in the private consumption demand.
Due to the support of lagged effects of the accommodative monetary policy, the recovery in the final domestic demand is expected to continue in the first quarter.
Recent acceleration in loan growth and domestic market orders also support this outlook.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment rate declined upon the rise in non-farm employment in October 2012.
Rise in the non-farm employment has mostly been driven by the services sector, while employment in the industrial sector has remained weak recently.
Furthermore, the employment expectation data in the Business Tendency Survey and the PMI employment data signal for improvements in employment conditions in the last quarter of 2012.
Other leading indicators also signal that mild increases in non-farm employment will continue.
However, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain to be critical factors that may restrain employment growth.
In the meeting, the Committee has assessed macroeconomic developments and forecasts to appear in the January Inflation Report.
It was concluded that there is no major revision in the factors affecting inflation outlook, and thus year-end inflation forecast would be kept at 5.3 percent.
It was stated that core inflation indicators are expected to continue their downward trend, yet the impact of increases in administered prices on the pricing behavior will be monitored closely.
Domestic demand follows a moderate pace while exports continue to increase despite weak global activity.
Overall, current account deficit continues to decline gradually.
The Committee has indicated that the recent credit growth has been faster than envisaged.
Developments regarding financial conditions such as rapid capital inflows, improving credit supply conditions, and accommodative monetary policy point to the risk of further acceleration in credit and domestic demand for the forthcoming period, necessitating a cautious stance against macro financial risks.
The Committee stated that, in order to contain the risks on financial stability, the proper policy would be to keep interest rates at low levels while continuing with macroprudential measures.
Accordingly, it was deemed appropriate to implement a measured tightening through reserve requirements, while delivering a limited downward shift in the interest rate corridor.
The Committee indicated that, although global risk perceptions have improved considerably in the recent period, persisting volatility in the cross border capital flows necessitate monetary policy to be flexible on both sides.
Ongoing monetary expansion in advanced economies, commitment to maintain this policy until economic indicators improve, and increasing global risk appetite have been the major factors leading to an acceleration in capital flows to emerging markets.
Nevertheless, the deleveraging process in advanced economies may impede the recovery in the economic activity and thus slow down the improvement in the budget balances.
In fact, despite the steps taken to resolve the problems in the euro area, outlook for credit markets and economic growth remain weak.
Meanwhile, uncertainty indices regarding the economic policy in major advanced economies are still at high levels.
Therefore, it is likely that the recent improvement in the risk sentiment may reverse course in the forthcoming period.
Should such a risk materialize, the Central Bank will take the necessary measures via the flexible policy framework it has developed.
Overall, ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.
Accelerating capital inflows and weak global economic outlook may aggravate macro financial risks, should they persist for a while.
The recent policies pursued by the Central Bank aim to prevent the build-up of risks arising from long lasting capital inflows.
In this respect, recent policies aim at containing rapid credit growth and appreciation pressures on domestic currency.
Macroprudential measures will continue to be taken, should the recent global trends persist and credit growth expectations exceed 15 percent for a long period.
On the other hand, aggregate demand and commodity prices may increase faster than expected and monetary policy may normalize in advanced economies, should the measures taken towards the solution of problems regarding the global economy be completed sooner and more decisively than envisaged.
Materialization of such a risk would increase pressures on inflation, and thus require a tightening using all policy instruments.
Unprocessed food prices continue to pose risks regarding inflation outlook.
Developments in unprocessed food prices were the main factors explaining the lower-than-expected inflation in 2012.
The possibility of this trend reversing in 2013 poses an upside risk on inflation.
The Committee will not respond to volatility in unprocessed food prices, yet will deliver the necessary tightening should this lead to deterioration in pricing behavior.
The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely, with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
Inflation forecasts take the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
Prudent fiscal and financial sector policies are crucial for preserving the resilience of our economy against existing global imbalances.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit would support macroeconomic stability in the medium- term.
This will also provide more flexibility for monetary policy and improve social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities persistently at low levels.
In January, consumer prices were up by 1.65 percent and annual inflation increased to 7.31 percent.
As also stated in the summary of the previous .
Committee (the Committee) Meeting, this is attributed to the tax adjustment in tobacco products and the rise in unprocessed food prices, which added around 1.5 percentage points to annual inflation in January.
On the other hand, core inflation indicators and prices of services remained on a relatively mild track.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went up to 6.85 percent.
Vegetable prices soared by 21.4 percent amid adverse weather conditions in January, pushing the annual unprocessed food inflation considerably upwards.
On the other hand, annual processed food inflation decreased.
Across subcategories, bread and cereals group maintained rising prices; whereas price increases in other processed food products lost pace in January.
Energy prices edged up in January, while the annual energy inflation went down to 11.90 percent with base effects.
On the other hand, international oil prices presently remain above the level projected in the January Inflation Report.
Annual services inflation remained unchanged on a monthly basis.
Annual inflation declined in transport services; contrary to a slight increase in other subcategories of services.
However, both the seasonally adjusted underlying trend and the diffusion index of the prices of services edged down and indicated that prices of services remained on a mild track.
Inflation in core goods group edged down in January.
As the seasonal sale in the clothing group in the last two months lagged behind that in the previous year, the annual rate of price increase trended upwards.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in subcategories excluding clothing maintained their downward trend.
Consequently, the Committee has indicated that core inflation indicators are expected to follow a mild course and inflation will continue to fall despite the recent increase in oil prices.
Industrial production data regarding the last quarter of 2012 suggests a weaker- than-expected economic activity.
The Committee indicated that the recovery in the domestic demand has not been reflected in the industrial production data yet, which may be explained by the ongoing inventory depletion.
In fact, surveys regarding the industrial sector point to a fall in the stocks of final products during the last quarter.
Data pertaining to the last quarter of 2012 on the current account and foreign trade confirm that the rebalancing between the domestic and external demand continues as envisaged.
In spite of the sluggish global growth, exports continued to increase owing to market and product diversification.
Meanwhile, the increase in imports maintained its mild course.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit continued to decline.
The Committee highlighted that domestic demand and imports may gradually gain momentum as of the first quarter of 2013.
Recently-released data on automobile sales, foreign trade, credits, consumer confidence index and expectations for orders obtained from surveys have pointed to a remarkable uptick in domestic demand stemming both from consumption and investment demand.
Seasonally adjusted employment continued to increase in November 2012.
However, unemployment increased slightly due to higher labor force participation rates.
The recent increase in non-farm employment was triggered mainly by the services sector, while employment in the industrial sector remained weak amid the developments in production.
A similar pattern is expected to prevail in December, while employment growth is expected to be more broad- based starting from early 2013.
Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy may restrain employment and investment growth in the forthcoming period.
The Committee has assessed that the expansionary impact of the monetary stimulus provided during the second half of 2012 will be visible in the forthcoming period.
In this respect, it is expected that final domestic demand will increase markedly in the first quarter, and the recovery will be reflected in the production more strongly starting from the second quarter.
The Committee has indicated that low level of capacity utilization rate contains the upside pressures on inflation, notwithstanding the revival in economic activity.
Accordingly, inflation is expected to continue to fall despite the elevated levels of oil prices.
Core inflation indicators are also expected to follow a mild course.
In the meantime, the impact of increases in administered prices on the pricing behavior will be monitored closely.
The Committee indicated that credit growth displayed a significant acceleration in the past three months due to strong capital inflows.
Moreover, the Committee stated that capital inflows during this period increased the appreciation pressures on the domestic currency.
Therefore, in order to contain the risks on financial stability, the proper policy would be to keep interest rates at low levels while continuing with macroprudential measures.
The Committee has indicated that cutting the lower bound of the interest rate corridor will limit the appreciation pressures on the Turkish lira and thus contain macro financial risks.
Moreover, improving risk appetite, declining interest rates in emerging markets, and more effective implementation of the Reserve Options Mechanism allows a downward adjustment in the upper bound of the interest rate corridor.
Meanwhile, it would be useful to increase reserve requirements in order to bring credit growth to more reasonable levels.
In light of these assessments, it was deemed appropriate to implement a measured tightening through reserve requirements, while delivering a limited downward shift in the interest rate corridor.
Ongoing monetary expansion in advanced economies and increasing global risk appetite have been leading to strong capital flows towards emerging markets.
In fact, despite the steps taken to resolve the problems in the euro area, outlook for credit markets and economic growth remain weak, and debt sustainability concerns continue.
In light of these assessments, the Committee stated that ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.
Therefore, the impact of the measures taken regarding credit, domestic demand, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely and the funding amount will be adjusted in either direction, as needed.
In the setting of monetary policy, the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program is taken as given.
In February, consumer prices were up by 0.30 percent and annual inflation decreased to 7.03 percent, which is attributed to food prices.
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators and prices of services remained on a mild track.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went down to 5.60 percent.
Annual unprocessed food inflation fell to 1.87 percent particularly due to vegetable prices.
Moreover, the deceleration in the monthly rate of increase in processed food prices got more pronounced in this period.
Although bread and cereals group maintained rising prices in line with the domestic wheat prices outlook, annual processed food inflation went down by 0.5 percentage points to 8.39 percent owing to the favorable course of other processed food products in February.
On the other hand, leading indicators point that annual unprocessed food inflation will rise in March.
Energy prices increased by 0.64 percent in February, while the annual energy inflation went down to 11.75 percent.
Domestic fuel prices rose by 1.85 percent upon the surge in international oil prices.
Meanwhile, international oil prices in March went back to the level projected in the January Inflation Report.
Annual services inflation crept up to 7.21 percent.
Across subcategories, annual inflation increased in communication and transport services; but remained unchanged in rents, restaurants, hotels and other services.
Meanwhile, both the seasonally adjusted underlying trend and the diffusion index of the prices of services edged up; yet the group’s prices remained on a mild track in February.
Inflation in core goods group rose by 0.14 percentage points to 4.46 percent.
Prices fell at a higher rate than seasonal averages in the clothing group; while durable goods prices saw increases due to automobile and furniture prices.
Thus, annual durable goods inflation, which has been recently decreasing, went up in February.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in core goods excluding clothing and durables maintained the downward trend.
Overall, seasonally adjusted data indicates that the underlying trends of core inflation indicators maintained their relatively mild track.
Data regarding the first quarter of 2013 suggests that economic activity continues to improve.
Industrial production increased on a monthly basis in January, partially compensating the decline in December.
Both the course of automobiles and white goods sales and credit data indicate that the domestic demand is on an upward track.
Survey indicators signal that a healthy recovery has started in final domestic demand due to a revival in both investment and consumption demand.
Recent data pertaining to the current account balance and foreign trade are as envisaged.
Notwithstanding the sluggish global growth, the underlying trend of exports displays a relatively positive outlook owing to the product and market diversification.
On account of the rebound in domestic demand, imports exhibit a marked increase.
This leads to some widening in the current account deficit.
Committee (the Committee) has assessed that the current policy framework will contain the deterioration in the current account balance.
Seasonally adjusted non-farm employment continued to increase, albeit at a slower pace, in December 2012.
However, unemployment rates edged up due to higher labor force participation rates.
The rise in the non-farm employment in this period was triggered mainly by the industrial sector, which settled on a trend of recovery in the last quarter of 2012.
In line with the rebound in economic activity, employment is expected to increase gradually in the forthcoming period.
Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy may restrain investment and employment growth in the forthcoming period.
During the early months of the year, financial conditions have improved markedly with the impetus from strong capital inflows, and consequently credit growth has hovered above the reference rates.
The Committee has assessed that first quarter credit growth suggests a trend faster than the reference rate of 15 percent which is deemed as healthy for Turkey.
Following the heightened global uncertainty, capital inflows have decelerated in the recent period.
Ongoing policy uncertainty in advanced economies and problems in the Euro area have led to a slowdown in capital inflows, once again increasing the volatility.
The Committee has decided to increase the effectiveness of the Reserve Options Mechanism (ROM) gradually in response to the heightened volatility in capital inflows.
The Committee indicated that, in order to enhance the automatic stabilizer effect of the mechanism, the coefficients should be adjusted upwards and a new tranche should be added to the existing scheme.
More effective utilization of the ROM reduces the need for a wider interest rate corridor.
In this respect, the interest rate corridor was made more symmetric by cutting the overnight lending rates by 100 basis points.
Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.
The Committee stated that liquidity management will be more important in the forthcoming period.
Accordingly, the share of one-month funding was decreased in order to tighten the liquidity conditions to some extent.
The Committee foresees that tighter liquidity policy along with the weaker capital inflows will slow down the credit growth.
Necessary measures will be taken through liquidity policy, ROM, and reserve requirements should the capital inflows re-accelerate.
Weakening global demand and the commodity price outlook contain the upside risks on inflation.
The fragile outlook of global economy exerts downward pressures on energy and base metal prices.
Moreover, recent developments suggest that the recovery in the Euro area—our largest trade destination, may be weaker than expected.
All these developments contain the upward pressures on inflation.
In the meantime, the impact of increases in credit and domestic demand on the pricing behavior will be monitored closely.
In March, consumer prices were up by 0.66 percent and annual inflation increased to 7.29 percent.
This rise was attributed to unprocessed food prices, while core inflation indicators remained on a mild track.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went up to 8.10 percent.
Mainly driven by the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables and the base effect, annual unprocessed food inflation jumped by around 5 percent and stood at 6.79 percent in March.
In addition to the persisting price increases in the bread and cereals group, annual processed food inflation went up owing to the rising processed meat prices as well.
On the other hand, leading indicators for April point that following the upsurge in the first quarter of the year, unprocessed food prices will be subject to a correction.
Energy prices maintained their favorable course in March.
First-quarter price increase, which was 4.1 percent on average in the 2010-2012 period, stood at 0.86 percent this year owing to the stable courses of oil prices and the Turkish lira.
On account of the base effect, group’s inflation is projected to fluctuate in the forthcoming period.
Prices of services went up by 0.42 percent in March and annual services inflation increased to 7.32 percent.
Across subcategories, rents and prices of transport services explain the rise in annual inflation.
Meanwhile, both the seasonally adjusted rate of increase of the prices of services and the diffusion index edged up in March.
Annual inflation in core goods group went down to 4.29 percent in March.
Annual inflation in the clothing group further decelerated following February, and inflation in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods also continued with its downward track.
On the other hand, annual inflation in durable goods group saw increases due to automobile and furniture prices in March as well.
Overall, seasonally adjusted data indicates that the underlying trend of core inflation indicators maintained on a relatively mild track.
Data regarding the first-quarter of 2013 point that final domestic demand follows a healthy recovery.
Having increased both in January and February subsequently, industrial production compensated the sharp decline in December and posted a quarterly increase.
In the same period, production and imports of both consumption and investment goods registered increases.
Domestic sales of automobiles and white goods besides the credit data regarding the first quarter also display a similar outlook.
Committee (the Committee) has assessed that final domestic demand would have a sizeable contribution to growth in the first quarter.
Data pertaining to foreign trade and the current account balance are evolving in line with expectations.
Exports slow down due to weak global economic activity.
As for imports, an increase was recorded upon the revival in domestic demand, which led to a rise in the current account deficit.
The Committee has assessed that current account deficit may continue to increase, yet the current policy framework and the decline in commodity prices would contain the widening in the current account deficit.
Seasonally adjusted non-farm employment continued to increase in January 2013, and unemployment rates receded.
This fall in unemployment was attributed to the rise in the non-farm employment.
The increase in the non-farm employment rate was mainly driven by the industrial sector, which settled on a trend of recovery in the last quarter of 2012.
Survey indicators suggest that industrial employment remained on an upward track.
Total employment is expected to register mild increases in the forthcoming period.
The Committee has indicated that domestic and external demand have been evolving in line with expectations.
Domestic demand follows a healthy recovery while exports slow down due to weak global economic activity.
Increases in the non-farm employment support the demand through disposable income growth.
Moreover, financial and monetary conditions continue to support domestic demand.
Therefore, the contribution of domestic demand to economic growth is expected to increase gradually.
In fact, developments for first quarter economic activity suggest a marked recovery in domestic demand, especially through investment demand: However, ongoning global uncertainty and weak external demand still pose downside risks regarding the recovery in economic activity.
Recently, the current account deficit has increased slightly following the revival in domestic demand.
However, the current policy framework and the decline in commodity prices are expected contain the widening in the current account deficit.
Current policy strategy contains the deterioration in the current account by weakening the impact of capital inflows on the credit growth and exchange rate 11.
Recently, there is a re-acceleration in capital inflows and credit growth hovers above the reference rate.
Both the improved risk perceptions towards Turkey and the monetary stimulus package announced by the Bank of Japan suggest that capital inflows may remain strong in the forthcoming period.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding Euro area may lead to fluctuations in the risk appetite.
All these developments once again point to the importance of having a flexible and multi-instrument monetary policy framework.
The Committee indicated that, in order to balance the risks on financial stability, the proper policy would be to keep interest rates low while increasing foreign currency reserves via macroprudential measures.
Accordingly, it was deemed appropriate to further increase the reserve options coefficients, while delivering a cut in the short term interest rates.
The Commitee has reiterated that more efficient use of reserve option mechanism reduces the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
Ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy and the volatility in capital flows necessitate the monetary policy to remain flexible in both directions.
The Committee has indicated that the weak global demand and the commodity price outlook contain the upward pressures on inflation.
Although unprocessed food prices pose upside risk regarding inflation forecasts, the fall in commodity prices partly offset this risk.
In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.
In April, consumer prices increased by 0.42 percent and annual inflation receded to 6.13 percent.
This fall was attributed to the base effect in energy prices besides the developments in unprocessed food prices.
Total contribution of the food and energy groups to the annual inflation posted a monthly decline by around 1 percentage point in April.
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators remained on a mild track.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went down to 6.83 percent.
Mainly driven by the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, unprocessed food prices fell by 2.79 percent in April.
In the meantime, price hikes in meat restrained the fall in the group’s prices.
Annual processed food prices did not post a noticeable month-on-month change in April, while the group’s annual inflation decreased to 8.26 percent.
Prices of bread and cereals besides processed meat continued to rise, in contrast to the mild course of other processed food prices.
Energy inflation maintained its favorable course owing to the decline in international oil prices, and the group’s prices fell by 0.98 percent in April.
Being also driven by the high base in the same period of the last year, annual energy inflation went down by 4.28 percentage points to 4.94 percent.
The base effect led by energy prices will remain as the determinant on the course of annual inflation in the period ahead.
The said effect is estimated to push inflation up in the May-July period, and pull it down later on.
Prices of services edged up by 0.54 percent in April, while annual services inflation remained flat with 7.26 percent on a monthly basis.
Annual inflation in transport and restaurant-hotel services decreased in contrast to the increase in other subcategories.
The uptrend in rent inflation has accelerated recently.
Meanwhile, both the seasonally adjusted rate of increase of the prices of services and the diffusion index registered an increase in April.
Annual inflation in core goods group went down to 3.61 percent in March.
All the subcategories of core goods saw a decline in annual inflation, and the seasonally adjusted figures settled on a downward track.
Notwithstanding the weak course in March, the industrial production index recorded a quarter-on-quarter increase.
Among the data regarding the second quarter, domestic sales of automobiles besides the credit data of April also point that the recovery of first quarter will continue.
The consumer confidence index also displays a similar outlook.
Committee (the Committee) assessed that final domestic demand would have a sizeable contribution to growth in the first half of the year.
Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy may restrain investment growth in the forthcoming period.
As for imports, an increase was recorded upon the revival in domestic demand, which will bring a rise in the current account deficit.
However, the Committee assessed that the current policy framework and the decline in commodity prices would contain the widening in the current account deficit.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that unemployment rates went down on account of the rise in employment in February 2013.
The increase in non-farm employment was mainly driven by the services sector besides the industrial sector, which settled on a trend of recovery in the last quarter of 2012.
Meanwhile, employment in the construction sector remained flat.
Survey indicators suggest that industrial employment will decelerate in the second quarter.
The Committee expects that total employment will register mild increases in the period ahead.
Capital inflows remain strong and credit growth hovers above the reference rate.
Accordingly, it was deemed appropriate to implement a measured tightening via reserve requirements and reserve options coefficients, while delivering a cut in the short term interest rates.
The Committee has continued its strategy to increase the effectiveness of the Reserve Options Mechanism (ROM) gradually in response to the heightened volatility in capital inflows.
The Committee has underscored that more effective utilization of the ROM reduces the need for a wider interest rate corridor.
In May, consumer prices edged up by 0.15 percent and annual inflation went up to 6.51 percent.
This rise was attributed to the base effect in energy prices.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation went up to 7.07 percent.
Processed food prices recorded an increase by 0.55 percent, while annual inflation receded to 8.19 percent in May.
The group’s monthly inflation increased mainly due to the bread and cereals group; whereas the contribution of other processed food prices proved limited.
On the other hand, mainly driven by the prices of fresh vegetables, unprocessed food prices fell by 5.33 percent; however, the group’s annual inflation registered an increase owing to the base effect.
Leading indicators pertaining to June point that the group’s annual inflation will soar.
Energy inflation maintained its favorable course owing to the decline in international oil prices, and the group’s prices fell by 0.69 percent in May.
Meanwhile, due to the elimination of the favorable base effect in the last couple of months, annual energy inflation went up by 1.30 percentage points to 6.24 percent.
The base effect led by energy prices is estimated to push inflation up in June, and pull it down considerably as of August.
Prices of services went up by 0.76 percent, and annual services inflation increased to 7.45 percent in May.
This rise in annual inflation was mainly attributed to rents and communication services.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that inflation will trend upwards across the services group, particularly in rents.
Meanwhile, the diffusion index remained almost unchanged on a monthly basis.
Annual inflation in core goods group did not record a noticeable change with 3.66 percent in May.
Following a consecutive decline for three months, the clothing group recorded a limited increase in May; while core goods inflation excluding clothing and durable goods continued with a stable trend of deceleration.
Seasonally adjusted figures settled on a downward track in May.
Accordingly, despite the uptrend in services inflation, seasonally adjusted trends of core inflation indicators registered a decline.
Committee (the Committee) reiterated its projection that base effects would push the energy inflation up in June, and underlined that the course of unprocessed food prices would lead to a surge in annual inflation in June.
Recently-released data point that both domestic and foreign demand developments unfold as envisaged.
National accounts data relating to the first quarter of 2013 released by the TurkStat suggest that economic activity increased in line with expectations.
Triggered by public investments and private consumption, final domestic demand proved the largest contributor of growth in this period.
On the other hand, exports remained flat in line with the weak global demand; while net exports contributed negatively to growth due to the increased import demand.
Thus, the balancing trend among demand components was subject to a slight deterioration in the first quarter.
Data pertaining to the second quarter point to a healthy recovery in final domestic demand.
Industrial production posted an increase in April compared to the first- quarter average.
Production and imports of consumption goods, sales of automobiles, credit data and confidence indices also indicate that domestic demand will continue to improve.
Indicators of investment display a favorable outlook; however, private investments are projected to have a limited contribution to growth in the second quarter.
Data regarding foreign trade and the current account balance are evolving in line with expectations.
Exports slow down due to weak global demand.
As for imports, an increase was recorded upon the revival in domestic demand besides the rise in demand for gold imports.
This is expected to create a slight increase in the current account deficit.
However, the Committee has kept its view that the current policy framework and the decline in commodity prices would contain the widening in the current account deficit.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that non-farm employment posted a plausible increase in March 2013; yet remained incapable of covering the increase in labor force participation, which led to a rise in unemployment rates.
Survey indicators suggest that industrial employment has been on an upward track within the second quarter.
Nevertheless, uncertainties regarding the global economy remain critical as they may restrain employment growth in the forthcoming period.
Amid the increased uncertainty regarding global monetary policies, capital inflows have recently slowed down.
Uncertainty about the exit strategy from quantitative easing policies implemented by the central banks of leading advanced economies as an integral part of accommodative monetary policies resulted in capital outflows from emerging economies.
Besides uncertain monetary policies, the ongoing deleveraging process in advanced economies and persisting impediments in the monetary transmission mechanism leads volatility to remain high.
The Committee assessed that the reserve options mechanism (ROM) functions as an automatic stabilizer against volatile capital inflows.
Banks increased the amount of foreign exchange reserves through the ROM in times of strong capital inflows, and they used these reserves held at the Central Bank in times of capital outflows.
Thus, the ROM contributed to contain the volatility in exchange rates.
The Committee stated that short term additional monetary tightening and foreign exchange selling auctions may be implemented when deemed necessary; and did not opt for any change in monetary policy instruments.
Meanwhile, the Committee declared that credit growth rates hover above the reference rate both in consumer and business loans.
The Committee expressed that the effects of properly recovering domestic demand, credit growth above the reference rate and the exchange rate movements driven by global uncertainties on the pricing behavior would be closely monitored.
In this respect, the Committee stated that necessary adjustments would be made in the composition of Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank.
The leading instrument in the adjustment of liquidity composition is the foreign exchange selling auctions that enable shifting from net foreign assets to net domestic assets and from permanent liquidity to short-term funding.
The Committee assessed that foreign exchange selling auctions would contain excessive depreciation pressure on the exchange rates under the market conditions; and also ease the rapid credit growth by shifting the TL liquidity to shorter maturities.
In June, consumer prices edged up by 0.76 percent and annual inflation reached 8.30 percent.
This uptick was attributed to the rise in unprocessed food prices besides the base effect in energy prices.
Total contribution of price increases in food and energy groups to annual inflation increased by 1.7 percentage points in June.
On the food and non-alcoholic beverages front, annual inflation soared by 5.81 percentage points to 12.88 percent.
As for the unprocessed food group, driven both by the price hikes in fresh fruits and the base effect in vegetable prices, annual inflation registered a remarkable increase.
On the other hand, annual processed food inflation receded to 8.11 percent.
Bread prices remained on an upward track in this group, while other processed food products maintained a mild course.
Leading indicators pertaining to July point that the downward correction in unprocessed food prices has not started yet.
Energy inflation went up owing to the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Due to the recent increases and the base effect, annual rate of increase in energy prices is envisaged to push annual inflation up in July as it did in June.
Meanwhile, the base effect is estimated to pull inflation down considerably as of August.
Prices of services went up by 1.19 percent, and annual services inflation increased to 7.88 percent in June.
Nearly 0.5 percentage points of the rise in annual inflation was attributed to the hikes in driving course fees.
Excluding this one-time effect, seasonally adjusted data suggest that the underlying trend of services inflation remained almost unchanged on a monthly basis.
Annual inflation in core goods group receded in all subcategories, particularly clothing, and stood at 3.28 percent in June.
It is observed that the depreciation in the Turkish lira has not been evidently reflected on to prices yet; and thus the seasonally adjusted trend of core goods prices maintained its downtrend in June.
Accordingly, seasonally adjusted trends of core inflation indicators remained on a mild course.
In sum, notwithstanding the mild course of core inflation indicators, inflation is expected to fluctuate in the short term due to the volatility in food and energy inflation, base effects and the movements in the exchange rates.
Accordingly, inflation is projected to rise in July before falling significantly in August.
Second-quarter data point that domestic demand follows a healthy recovery in line with expectations.
Industrial production posted an increase in April-May period compared to the first-quarter average.
Industrial production is envisaged to register a month-on-month increase in June as well.
Improved consumer confidence in April and May underpinned the rise in domestic demand.
Despite the slight decline in confidence indices in June, consumption demand is expected to pick up on a quarterly basis in the second quarter.
In fact, sales of automobiles and credit growth maintained a robust trend of increase in this period.
Although displaying a favorable outlook, indicators of investment demand point to a weaker growth compared to the consumption demand.
Data regarding the second quarter foreign trade and the current account balance are in line with expectations.
Import demand revives upon the recovery in the domestic demand, while exports grow at a moderate pace.
Annual cumulative foreign trade and current account deficit figures in the short term are expected to continue with an upward trend mainly due to gold imports.
On the other hand, the current policy framework, which puts special emphasis on macro-financial risks, limits the deterioration in the current account balance.
Accordingly, current account deficit, excluding gold trade, has been on a stable course.
Non-farm employment remained on a steadily increasing track in April 2013.
Nevertheless, seasonally adjusted unemployment rate remained unchanged upon the rise in employment participation rate.
While the recent rise in non-farm employment was mainly driven by the industrial sector besides the construction sector, service sector employment remained flat.
The PMI data signal that industrial employment will continue to increase, albeit at a decelerating pace.
Yet, uncertainty regarding the global economy remains as risk factor that may restrain investment and employment growth in the forthcoming period.
The meeting included an assessment of the impact of the recent developments in capital flows, which have weakened since May due to increasing uncertainty regarding the global monetary policies.
The Committee observed that loan growth continues to hover above the reference rate despite the slowdown in capital flows, indicating that tightening the monetary policy stance under these circumstances would support financial stability.
The Committee also assessed the medium term projections prepared for the July Inflation Report.
It was stated that several coinciding developments have recently affected inflation expectations adversely.
Surging unprocessed food prices, rising oil prices, and the increased exchange rate volatility may continue to have adverse impact on inflation in the short term.
Overall, given the assumptions underlying the inflation forecasts and external conditions, end-2013 inflation forecast was revised upwards mainly on account of the developments in the exchange rate and oil prices.
These developments are expected to have a limited effect on end-2014 inflation due to the weak outlook of the global economy and the mild course of domestic demand.
Yet, the Committee indicated that a measured monetary tightening is deemed necessary in order to contain a deterioration in the pricing behavior.
In order to support the price and financial stability, the Committee decided to raise the upper bound of the interest rate corridor.
It was underscored that cautious stance will be maintained until the inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets.
In this respect, additional monetary tightening will be implemented when necessary.
Currently, data regarding global economic activity do not reveal a stable pattern.
Risk appetite and capital flows may remain volatile, should uncertainties regarding economic policies of advanced economies persist.
This situation may pose risks regarding the outlook for inflation and financial stability.
Materialization of such a risk will prompt the Central Bank to use the interest corridor and other policy instruments to contain the excessive volatility in the exchange rate.
On the other hand, the possibility of further delays in the global recovery and the continuation of quantitative easing policies for an extended period by the central banks of advanced economies remain as downside risks, in which case capital flows to emerging economies may re-accelerate.
Materialization of such a scenario would prompt the Central Bank to engage in a strategy in which short- term money market rates are lowered by easing liquidity conditions, while the adverse impact of rapid capital inflows on financial stability is alleviated through reserve requirement policy and reserve options mechanism.
Due to ongoing uncertainties regarding the global economy and the volatility in capital flows, the Committee decided to increase the flexibility of the liquidity management.
To this end, developments regarding price stability and financial stability will be closely monitored and necessary adjustments will be made in the composition of Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank.
The Committee monitors fiscal policy developments and tax adjustments closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
The baseline monetary policy stance takes the fiscal framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
In July, consumer prices edged up by 0.31 percent and annual inflation reached 8.88 percent.
This uptick was attributed to the base effect besides the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Meanwhile, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators exhibited an increase.
On the food front, annual inflation edged down to 12.72 percent.
As for the unprocessed food group, upon the rising meat prices despite falling prices in fresh fruits and vegetables, annual inflation remained unchanged on a monthly basis.
On the other hand, annual processed food inflation receded further due to the favorable course of the prices excluding bread and cereals.
Under the current outlook, cumulative increase of unprocessed food prices across 2013 hovers above the averages of past periods.
Leading indicators point to a downward course in the group’s annual inflation.
Energy prices went up owing to the depreciation in the Turkish lira coupled with increasing oil prices.
Due to the base effect, the annual energy inflation is envisaged to considerably decline as of August.
Prices of services went up by 0.79 percent, and annual services inflation reached 7.97 percent in July, which was attributed to communication and other services.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the underlying trend of services inflation remained on an upward course in July.
Annual inflation in core goods group went up by around 1 percentage point to 4.23 percent in July.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed up the annual inflation in durable goods.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in other subcategories of core goods remained on a downward track.
As a result, the seasonally-adjusted trend of increase in core goods recorded an uptick.
Given this outlook of services and core goods, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators trended upwards as well.
In sum, while inflation is expected to start falling from August onwards as envisaged, pricing behavior is closely monitored.
Recent data suggest that domestic and external demand developments are in line with expectations.
In the second quarter, increases in production and imports of consumption and investment goods continued with lower increases compared to the first quarter, while sales of automobiles and credit growth maintained their robust trends.
Triggered also by rising exports excluding gold, industrial production maintained a steady trend of increase in the second quarter.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding global economic policies besides the volatility in capital flows fuel the downside risks in the third quarter.
Supporting this, indicators of the Business Tendency Survey and PMI in July reveal receding figures compared to the averages of the second quarter.
Data regarding foreign trade and the current account balance are in line with expectations.
Gradual improvement in the current account deficit, excluding gold trade, continues.
The current policy framework, with the additional support from recent macroprudential policies, will continue to improve the current account balance.
Accordingly, the deterioration in demand components, which appeared in the first half of the year, is expected to start improving by the third quarter.
According to the seasonally adjusted data, non-farm employment remained on a steadily increasing track in the May 2013 period.
Nevertheless, the ratio of the non-farm labor force to the working age population increased more, resulting in the total and non-farm unemployment rates to increase compared to the previous period.
While the recent rise in non-farm employment was mainly driven by the industrial sector besides the services sector, employment in the construction sector exhibited a decline.
Total Employment Expectation, among the CBRT Business Tendency Survey indicators and the PMI Employment Index signal that industrial employment will continue to increase in the third quarter, albeit at a decelerating pace.
Yet, uncertainty regarding the global economy remains as a risk factor that may restrain investment and employment growth in the forthcoming period.
Recent volatilities in financial markets were discussed in the meeting.
Developments regarding global monetary policies since May have been leading to the re-pricing of all financial assets.
Lingering uncertainties particularly in the monetary policies of developed economies fuel the volatility in financial markets.
In line with these developments, the weight of emerging market assets in global portfolio investments is observed to decrease.
Although economic fundamentals are supposed to determine capital movements in the medium and long-term, uncertainties in monetary policies stemming from developed economies lead to financial fluctuations.
The Euro area survived the recession and posted positive growth figures in the second quarter, which is considered to be favorable for the current account balance.
Nevertheless, the recently-released data suggest that the global economy has not settled into a stable growth trend yet.
Due to the unstable outlook regarding the global economic activity coupled with the uncertainties regarding the monetary policies of developed economies, future capital flows are envisaged to remain volatile.
Against this backdrop, the Committee assessed that it is important to maintain the flexibility of the Turkish lira liquidity management.
Credit growth rates continue to hover above the reference rate.
The recently- weakening capital flows and the recent macroprudential measures are expected to restrain credit growth rates.
In such a conjuncture , the Committee assessed that being also supported by the cautious monetary policy stance, credit growth rates would gradually go down to more plausible levels.
This gradual slowdown in the credit growth rate will not only improve the current account deficit, but also support financial stability.
The high course of unprocessed food prices, the base effect from energy prices and the effects of exchange rate movements led the inflation to high figures as expected.
Inflation is expected to start falling from August onwards as envisaged.
Yet, in order to contain the adverse impact of the above-target inflation indicators on the pricing behavior, the Committee has decided to strengthen the cautious stance of the monetary policy.
The cautious stance will be maintained until the inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets.
In this respect, additional monetary tightening will be implemented whenever needed.
In order to increase the effectiveness of the additional monetary tightening, the Committee has decided to raise the overnight lending rate from 7.25 percent to 7.75 percent.
In August, consumer prices edged down by 0.10 percent and annual inflation receded to 8.17 percent, which was attributed to unprocessed food and energy prices.
Food and energy groups added 0.9 percentage points less to the annual inflation compared to July.
Due to the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira, core inflation indicators exhibited a slight increase.
Annual inflation in the food group went down to 10.25 percent.
The unprocessed food group saw falling inflation amid plunging prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the processed food front, despite the decelerating course of the prices of bread and cereals, annual inflation reached 8.32 percent upon rising prices of other processed food products.
Leading indicators point to a further downward movement in the annual unprocessed inflation in September.
Energy prices went up owing to the depreciation of the Turkish lira coupled with increasing oil prices.
Nevertheless, the annual energy inflation declined due to the base effect in August.
Similarly, the annual energy inflation is envisioned to decline further in September, despite the persisting rise in fuel and bottled gas prices.
Prices of services edged up by 0.61 percent, and the annual services inflation reached 8.18 percent in August.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the underlying trend of services inflation remained on a high track as well.
Annual inflation in the core goods group climbed to 4.58 percent in August.
Durable goods prices continued to rise, while the seasonal price reduction in the clothing group remained below that in past years.
In this framework, due to the depreciation of the Turkish lira, the seasonally-adjusted trend of increase in core goods prices followed an upward course.
In sum, inflation is expected to fall further in the upcoming period; yet core inflation indicators are foreseen to remain above the target for a while.
GDP exhibited a stronger-than-expected growth in the second quarter of 2013.
Final domestic demand, which surged in the first quarter in seasonally-adjusted terms, remained flat in the second quarter.
Meanwhile, the change in stocks contributed greatly both to the quarterly and annual growth.
On the other hand, exports followed a milder course amid the weakening global demand.
Thus, aggregate demand conditions did not exert an upside pressure on inflation.
Recent data suggest that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at a moderate pace.
Production and imports of consumption goods registered increases in July on a quarterly basis, while available data on the sales of white goods and automobiles and credit utilization of the third quarter indicate an uptick in consumption demand.
Imports of capital goods and production of capital goods excluding vehicles besides the production of other non-metallic minerals display a sluggish outlook in investments.
Industrial production in July posted higher figures compared to the average of the previous quarter.
Indicators of the PMI, the Business Tendency Survey and leading exports data reveal a mild recovery across the third quarter.
Despite an expected increase in the annual cumulative current account deficit due to the base effect from the gold trade in the short term, it is anticipated that gradual improvement in the current account balance excluding gold trade will continue.
Due to the slowdown in non-farm employment, the seasonally adjusted unemployment displayed an increase in the June 2013 period.
Most of the subcategories, primarily the industrial sector employment, exhibited a decline in this period.
Total Employment Expectation, among the CBRT Business Tendency Survey indicators, and the PMI Employment Index signal that industrial employment may remain weak.
In addition, uncertainty regarding the global economy remains as a risk factor that may restrain investment and employment growth in the forthcoming period.
Inflation is expected to fall further in the forthcoming period.
The Committee indicated that, under the assumptions of no additional adjustments in administered prices and the continuation of benign trend in unprocessed food prices, year-end inflation is likely to be close to the forecast presented at the July Inflation Report.
However, core inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time due to the exchange rate volatility observed during the recent months.
The impact of these developments on the pricing behavior is closely monitored.
Therefore, the Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained and additional monetary tightening will be implemented at the appropriate frequency until the medium term inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets.
The current policy framework is improving the current account balance.
The weakness in capital flows, cautious monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures undertaken will gradually bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels.
Accordingly, gradual decline in the current account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to continue.
According to the Committee, increasing the predictability of the Turkish lira liquidity policy is important in order to contain the repercussions of uncertainties in global monetary policies on the domestic economy.
It was underlined that fluctuations in financial markets in this period largely reflect a “re-pricing” effect.
Thus, the strategy to reduce policy rate uncertainty contributes greatly to the prevention of the economy from being dragged into a vicious circle that is not driven by economic fundamentals.
In fact, it was expressed that, following a clearer signal regarding the monetary policy, the sensitivity of domestic policy rates to global rates has weakened to a large extent and recently market rates rather respond to domestic macroeconomic developments, as they should.
Recent developments have shown that global economy continues to be fragile.
Therefore, developments regarding price stability and financial stability will be closely monitored and necessary adjustments will continue to be made in the composition of Turkish lira liquidity provided by the Central Bank.
Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
Strengthening the structural reform agenda that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability in the medium-term.
In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms outlined by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.
In September, consumer prices edged up by 0.76 percent and annual inflation receded to 7.88 percent, which was attributed to unprocessed food and energy prices.
Due to the depreciation of the Turkish lira, core inflation indicators remained on an increasing track.
Annual inflation in the food group went down to 8.73 percent.
The unprocessed food group saw a decline by 3.85 percentage points to 9.02 percent in annual inflation due to falling prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the processed food front, annual inflation reached 8.48 percent despite the decelerating course of the prices of bread and cereals.
Energy prices went up by 1.38 percent owing to the depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Nevertheless, the annual energy inflation declined owing to the base effect.
Due to the elimination of the effect of public price adjustments in October in the same period of the previous year, the annual energy inflation is envisioned to decline further.
Prices of services increased by 0.90 percent, and the annual services inflation edged up to 8.22 percent in September.
Annual inflation in the core goods group climbed to 5.74 percent in September.
The effects of the exchange-rate pass-through are particularly visible in prices of durable goods.
On account of this outlook for services and core goods, the underlying trend of an increase in core inflation indicators followed an upward course.
In sum, inflation is expected to fall further in the upcoming period; yet, core inflation indicators are foreseen to remain above the target for a while due to recent exchange rate developments.
Recently-released data indicate that final domestic demand exhibited a mild recovery in the third quarter.
Consumption goods displayed a decrease in the July-August period compared to the second quarter, while available data regarding the imports of consumption goods and the sales of white goods and automobiles indicate an increase in consumption demand.
On the other hand, imports of capital goods and production of capital goods excluding vehicles besides the production of other non-metallic minerals display a sluggish outlook in investments compared to consumption demand.
Indicators of the PMI and the Business Tendency Survey reveal a mild recovery across the third quarter.
Headline PMI and PMI production indices remained above the second-quarter-levels.
Moreover, the three-month-ahead expectation for orders increased due to developments in the domestic and export markets.
On the other hand, it should be noted that the consumer confidence index and the firms’ expectations of future investments, which have an important role in the private sector consumption and investment demand, display an unfavorable outlook.
The industrial production index, which increased in July, plunged in August and therefore remained below the average of the previous quarter in the July-August period.
Figures pertaining to August are considered to fail to fully reflect the underlying trend due to the religious holiday.
Thus, it is assessed that the seasonally and calendar-adjusted industrial production data should be handled cautiously.
Recently data suggest that exports continue to grow at a moderate pace.
The exports volume index excluding gold recorded a mild increase in the July-August period compared to the average of the previous quarter.
The import demand from the Euro area, which is the leading trade partner, has recently exhibited a recovery following a protracted sluggish course.
Moreover, PMI indicators reveal a recovery on a global scale.
Therefore, external demand conditions are expected to support exports in the upcoming period.
In 12-month cumulative terms, imports excluding gold follow a flat course, while exports excluding gold remain on a mild increasing track.
Against this background, in spite of the expected increase in the annual cumulative current account deficit due to the base effect from the gold trade in the short term, it is anticipated that gradual improvement in the current account balance excluding gold trade will continue.
Due to the slowdown in non-farm employment, seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates displayed an increase in the July 2013 period.
Most of the subcategories, primarily the construction sector employment, posted a decline in this period.
The PMI employment index and the data regarding employment expectation signal that the decline in employment may lose pace from September.
The Committee assessed the medium term projections prepared for the October Inflation Report.
It is stated that annual consumer inflation in the third quarter of 2013 realized above the July forecasts due to a weaker Turkish lira and higher unprocessed food prices.
Exchange rate developments affect core inflation via prices of core goods.
Overall, given the assumptions underlying the inflation forecasts and external conditions, the end-2013 inflation forecast was revised upwards mainly on account of the developments in the exchange rate, oil prices and output gap.
These developments are expected to be temporary and have a more limited effect on end-2014 inflation.
However, core inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time and the impact of these developments on pricing behavior is closely monitored.
The Committee has indicated that it will maintain the cautious monetary policy stance and continue implementing additional monetary tightening at the appropriate frequency until the medium term inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets.
The present policy framework is contributing to the improvement in the current account balance.
The cautious monetary policy stance, the macroprudential measures undertaken and weak capital flows will gradually bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels.
Accordingly, a gradual decline in the current account deficit excluding the gold trade is expected to continue.
Financial markets have recently exhibited increased uncertainty mainly stemming from global monetary policies.
This increased uncertainty prompted a re-pricing of all financial assets including exchange rates; and the weight of emerging economies in global portfolio investments posted a decline.
Against this background, monetary policy adopted a cautious stance with a view to balance macro financial risks and to restrain the deterioration in the inflation outlook.
In addition, predictability of the monetary policy was increased in order to restrain the effects of global volatilities on the Turkish economy.
The Committee has stated that the rise in the predictability of the monetary policy will continue gradually in the forthcoming period.
In the case of uncertainties regarding global monetary policies alleviating in the upcoming months, both advanced and emerging economies might be favorably affected.
In that case, capital flows to emerging economies are likely to re- accelerate.
The Committee has indicated that materialization of such a scenario may prompt the Central Bank to take steps towards accumulating foreign exchange reserves.
On the other hand, in the case of aggravation of uncertainties regarding global monetary policies, there may be consequences on global liquidity, capital flows and the pricing of financial assets.
In that case, capital flows to emerging economies are likely to remain weak, which may pose a risk to the inflation outlook.
The Committee has stated that in the materialization of such a scenario, the Central Bank may start implementing additional monetary tightening for longer periods to enhance price stability.
Food and energy prices are among other factors to pose risks to inflation forecasts.
The correction in the unprocessed food prices remained below expectations in the third quarter.
Thus, unprocessed food prices, which followed a high course in the first three quarters in comparison with past averages, pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
Energy prices are assumed to preserve the rather favorable course compared to recent years in the rest of the year.
Nevertheless, cumulative effects of the depreciation of the Turkish lira and the international oil price developments pose an upside risk on administered energy prices, albeit limited.
In October, consumer prices edged up by 1.80 percent while annual inflation went down to 7.71 percent, which was mostly attributed to energy prices.
With the delayed effects of exchange rate movements since May, core inflation indicators remained on an upward track.
Annual food inflation surged to 11.13 percent due to unprocessed food prices, driven by fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
Thus, annual unprocessed food inflation rose to 14.95 percent in October.
On the processed food front, despite rising bread and cereal prices, annual inflation declined to 8 percent thanks to slowing price increase of other processed food items.
October’s energy prices edged down by 0.38 percent, due to the fall in local fuel prices largely amid decreasing international oil prices.
In addition, with pulling out of last year’s massive price hikes, annual energy inflation receded to 2.14 percent.
Annual services inflation fell to 7.86 percent in October.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that the underlying trend of services inflation decreased on a monthly basis.
Annual core goods inflation increased to 7.10 percent due to delayed effects of exchange rate developments.
The increase in prices of durable consumer goods continued while seasonal hikes in clothing prices were above the previous years.
Hence, core inflation indicators remained elevated in October.
Recent data releases point to moderation in final domestic demand for the third quarter.
The production and imports of consumer goods increased quarter-on- quarter during the third quarter.
Similarly, data on sales of appliances and automobiles indicate a third-quarter increase in consumer demand.
Meanwhile, investments remain weak.
The production of capital goods, an indicator of investment demand, was up quarter-on-quarter, but mainly on exports, not domestic demand.
The large third-quarter decline in imports of capital goods suggests that investments on machinery and equipment have not recovered yet.
On the production side, economic activity experienced a mild slowdown during the third quarter.
The industrial production index saw a solid growth in September, which, however, was an offset to the August plunge.
In fact, industrial production posted a slower quarterly growth in the third quarter.
Data on the latest quarter suggest that economic activity will continue to grow moderately.
Although the October PMI data point to some slowdown, the Business Tendency Survey’s three-month ahead expectations were significantly higher on both domestic and exports markets.
Among indicators of confidence, a key ingredient for private consumer and investment demand, both the consumer confidence index and the firms’ prospects for new investments increased.
Recent indicators suggest that exports continue to grow modestly.
The non-gold export volume index was slightly up from the second-quarter average in the third quarter.
After prolonged sluggishness, the import demand from the EU, Turkey’s top trading partner accounting for a substantial portion of Turkish exports, has displayed some recovery lately.
Moreover, global PMI data show signs of global economic recovery.
Thus, external demand conditions are expected to support exports in coming months.
Foreign trade and current account balance are in line with expectations.
In 12- month cumulative terms, non-gold exports remain on a modest uptrend, while non-gold imports post a relatively slower growth.
Accordingly, despite the likely short-term increase, driven by base effects from gold trade, in the annual cumulative current account deficit, the gradual improvement in the non-gold trade current account deficit will continue.
In the third quarter, seasonally adjusted unemployment rose quarter-on-quarter on slowing non-farm employment.
The slowdown in non-farm employment was evident across all subcategories.
However, leading indicators for industrial employment show some improvement for September-October and suggest that employment will no longer weaken in the fourth quarter.
Yet, global economic uncertainties remain a constraint to investment and employment growth over the upcoming period.
In light of these developments, the Committee assessed that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at a moderate pace.
Third quarter data suggest a limited slowdown, while indicators regarding the final quarter exhibit some recovery in economic activity.
According to the judgment of the Committee, aggregate demand conditions suggest that output gap is close to zero.
Besides the level of the output the composition is also closely monitored with regard to its implications on the external balance.
The cautious monetary policy stance, recently announced macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows have led to a notable tightening in financial conditions, which is expected to bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels in the forthcoming period.
Accordingly, moderate decline in the current account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to continue.
Inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time due to the exchange rate volatility observed during the recent months.
In order to contain the impact of these developments on the pricing behavior, the Committee decided to strengthen the cautious stance and reduce the volatility of short term money market rates.
The Committee indicated that decreasing the volatility of interest rates in response to the weakening capital flows would be help to contain the adverse effects of the uncertain global monetary policy on the domestic economy.
Therefore, the Committee agreed to adopt a monetary policy stance in which short term interest rates follow a more predictable and stable course.
The Committee stated that a liquidity management strategy that keeps the interbank overnight rate close to the upper bound of the interest rate corridor would not only limit the volatility of short term interest rates but also point to a more cautious policy stance.
To this end, one month repo auctions will be terminated and thus the central bank funding will be conducted largely through overnight lending, as a result of which interbank money market rates will materialize around 7.75 percent.
This decision will lead to a tightening through both a shortening in the maturity of the central bank funding and also through an increase in the marginal lending rates.
The Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance should be maintained until the inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets.
It was underscored that, given the recent developments in monetary and financial conditions, monetary policy stance is appropriate.
However, it was also stated caution should be exercised against developments that may worsen the inflation outlook.
In November, consumer prices remained constant, while annual inflation declined to 7.32 percent.
Unprocessed food prices and clothing prices that increased at a lower rate than seasonal averages were influential in this development.
In this period, core inflation indicators followed a downward course.
Annual food group inflation receded to 9.77 percent.
In November, unprocessed food group inflation decreased due to fresh fruit and vegetable prices and became 12.93 percent.
Processed food prices increased by 0.49 percent while the group’s annual inflation declined to 7.35 percent.
Leading indicators for December suggest that the decline in annual food group inflation will continue.
In November, energy prices increased by 0.25 percent, while annual energy inflation rose to 2.68 percent.
Energy inflation continues to follow a favorable course, but will increase in December particularly due to sharp increases in LPG and bottled gas prices.
In November, services prices increased by 0.35 percent and the group’s annual inflation rose to 7.96 percent.
Among subcategories, annual inflation increased in rent and other services.
Meanwhile, although services inflation remains elevated, seasonally adjusted data indicate a slowdown in the underlying trend.
Annual core goods inflation, which has been following a volatile trend for the last two months due to clothing prices, fell to 6.47 percent in November.
Similarly, seasonally adjusted data suggest that the group’s underlying trend decreased.
Accordingly, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators declined in November.
In sum, the Committee expects that inflation will continue to fall in the upcoming period but core inflation indicators will remain above the target for a while.
Recent data releases suggest that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow moderately.
According to third-quarter national income data announced by TurkStat, economic activity increased in line with expectations.
Investigating the contributions made by demand components to quarterly growth, it is seen that the highest contribution comes from private demand.
Considering the seasonally adjusted data with expenditure approach; private consumption expenditures were higher compared to the second quarter, while private machinery-equipment investments increased mildly.
Private construction investments grew robustly in the third quarter as in the previous quarter.
In the third quarter, both exports and imports decreased on a quarterly basis, while the balancing between external demand components displayed a more positive outlook compared to the second quarter since the decline in exports was more modest.
Thus, the contribution of net exports to quarterly growth became positive for the first time in 2013.
The quarterly contributions of public sector and stock change were negative.
Data releases suggest that final domestic demand will continue to recover in the fourth quarter.
The consumer confidence index, one of the indicators regarding the confidence channel that plays a major role in private consumption demand, increased moderately.
Investments display a similar pattern to consumption demand.
The expectation for fixed capital investment spending asked in the Business Tendency Survey continued to rise in November –a trend that started in September– thanks to waning global and domestic uncertainties.
Thus, private sector investments are expected to increase moderately in the last quarter of the year.
Survey indicators for October-November suggest that economic activity continues to grow modestly.
In fact, both the Business Tendency Survey’s past-three-month production question and the PMI index exceeded their third- quarter averages.
The BTS’ three-month-ahead expectations for both domestic and export markets increased significantly.
The non- gold export volume index was down in October from the previous month, but its underlying trend is thought to be following an upward track similar to that of production data.
In fact, after prolonged sluggishness, the import demand from the EU, Turkey’s leading trading partner accounting for a substantial portion of Turkish exports, has displayed some recovery lately.
Thus, external demand conditions are expected to support exports in the upcoming period.
Data on foreign trade and current account balance are in line with expectations.
In 12-month cumulative terms, non-gold exports remain on a modest uptrend, while non-gold imports post a relatively limited growth.
Accordingly, it is anticipated that excluding the gold trade, the modest improvement in current account deficit will continue.
According to seasonally adjusted data, total unemployment rate rose in September 2013 from the previous period, while non-farm unemployment rate declined.
However, both the labor participation rate and non-farm employment was down in September from the previous period.
Across subcategories of non-farm employment, employment remains weak in the industrial sector, but is slightly increasing in construction and services sectors.
Leading indicators suggest that the weakening course of employment may continue in the October period.
Yet, global economic uncertainties may remain a constraint to employment growth for the upcoming period.
The Committee assessed that final domestic demand and exports continue to grow at a moderate pace and that aggregate demand conditions do not exert an evident downside or upside pressure on inflation.
The Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance, the announced macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows will bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels.
Accordingly, the moderate decline in the current account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to continue.
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators are likely to hover above the inflation target for some time.
The Committee stated that the cautious monetary stance should be maintained until the inflation outlook is in line with the medium-term targets.
The current policy stance is regarded to be appropriate to contain inflationary risks.
The Committee underlined the importance of a policy stance where the short- term market rates follow a more predictable and stable course in order to contain the effects of the uncertainty that stems from global monetary policies on the domestic economy.
Accordingly, to increase the predictability of short- term rates, the Committee stated that interbank market rates would be ensured to materialize around 7.75 percent, and the weighted average funding cost of funding would be at or above 6.75 percent.
It was also decided that the composition of the liquidity injected to the market would be adjusted accordingly.
The Committee made assessments on the reserve options mechanism (ROM).
It was stated that the ROM functioned in accordance with its aim and steps might be taken to strengthen its feature as an automatic stabilizer in the upcoming period.
Accordingly, it was expressed that reserve option coefficients especially in the last tranches might be gradually increased.
The Committee also declared that increases in reserve option coefficients and the FX selling auctions would increase the funding requirement of the financial system.
Thus, the effectiveness of the provided interest rate predictability will be reinforced.
The Committee has stated that with these developments, the cautious monetary policy stance will continue to contribute to domestic and foreign demand rebalancing, to more plausible growth rates in especially consumer credits and to the decline in inflation.
In November, consumer prices rose by 0.18 percent and annual inflation edged up by 0.19 points to 9.15 percent.
This rise in annual inflation was mainly driven by food prices.
Meanwhile, the energy inflation declined considerably in line with the international oil prices.
The underlying core goods inflation increased slightly, while the services inflation lost pace due to the favorable effects of falling energy prices.
Annual food inflation rose by 1.81 percentage points to 14.37 percent.
This rise was led particularly by fresh fruits and vegetables, the annual inflation of which soared due to the base effect.
The seasonally-adjusted data pointed to a partial correction in unprocessed food prices in the last three months.
However, the unfavorable outlook that spilled over into processed food prices continued in November and inflation climbed to 13.61 percent in this group.
Indicators for December signal a possible decline in the annual food inflation due to the unprocessed food group.
Energy prices decreased by 1.44 percent in November, and the group’s annual inflation dropped to 2.68 percent.
The first-round effects of the decline in oil prices on energy prices, and consumer inflation in turn, appeared in fuel and bottled gas prices.
Brent crude oil prices decreased approximately by USD 30 in the July- November period, and the direct effect of this decline through fuel and bottled gas prices on the consumer inflation was around -0.5 points in this period.
Indicators for December suggest that in line with the decline in oil prices, the downward course in these two items continued, being more pronounced in fuel prices.
Accordingly, the annual energy inflation is foreseen to decrease notably in December.
Annual core goods inflation increased approximately by 0.4 points to 9.36 percent in November.
Annual inflation increased in durables and clothing, but remained on a downtrend in core goods excluding these items.
Prices of services did not record a noticeable month-on-month change and the group’s annual inflation receded by 0.36 points to 8.81 percent.
The decline in oil prices affected particularly fuel-related services groups positively, such as transport and package tours.
This effect is projected to continue in the upcoming period.
The seasonally-adjusted data point to a sustained improvement in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators.
The fall in the underlying trend of services inflation triggered by the items closely related to fuel prices contributed to this development.
Data released by TurkStat show that the GDP grew by a mere 1.7 percent year-on- year during the third quarter of 2014.
On the production front, the marked yearly decline in the agricultural value-added has been a major factor in the slow GDP growth.
On the expenditure front, the final domestic demand made a positive contribution to annual growth after contributing negatively a quarter ago, while net exports have been the main driver of annual growth.
Among components of domestic demand, private demand has made a smaller contribution than public demand.
Data announced for the final quarter of 2014 point to an improved outlook for economic activity compared to the previous quarter.
Even though industrial production decreased by 1.8 percent month-on-month in October, this realization stems largely from the correction of previous months and the effects of shifting holidays on seasonal adjustments.
October-November data from the PMI and the Business Tendency Survey are actually signaling an increase in the fourth-quarter economic activity.
Survey indicators show that expectations for the domestic market are stronger than those for exports.
In this regard, with the support of the recovery in domestic demand, moderate growth in production is expected in the fourth quarter.
Leading data on the expenditure side point to a moderate fourth-quarter recovery in private domestic demand.
During October-November, automobile sales continued to grow robustly quarter-on-quarter.
Loans, on the other hand, remain on a modest growth path.
Furthermore, the recovery in expectations for investment during the past three months is notable.
Yet, consumer confidence has been weak throughout the last three months, suggesting that the downside risks on consumption still exist.
External demand indicators point to no improvement in the rebalancing process based on goods excluding gold, which ground to a halt in the third quarter.
Europe’s slowing economy and geopolitical tensions have caused exports to lose some pace.
However, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans are expected to contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
In seasonally adjusted terms, total and nonfarm unemployment rates were higher in September than in the previous period.
The rise in unemployment rates was caused by the increase in the ratio of nonfarm labor force to working-age population.
All nonfarm subsectors, services in particular, added to employment growth.
Total employment expectations, a Business Tendency Survey indicator, have moved further into positive territory during the final quarter.
In this regard, nonfarm employment might see a modest increase in the final quarter.
To sum up, fourth-quarter data point to a moderate recovery in economic activity.
In this period, external demand remains weak, while the contribution of domestic demand to growth is at moderate levels.
Yet, the prevailing signs of global economic slowdown, the uncertainty surrounding global monetary policies and geopolitical tensions put downside pressure on growth.
Against this background, demand conditions are expected to support disinflation process.
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures.
The composition of loans also continues to move in the desired direction.
While the annual growth rate of consumer loans hovers around low levels, commercial loans remain relatively more robust.
This loan outlook not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
Additional tightening measures will be taken, should credit growth accelerate in a way that poses upside risks to inflation and aggravates financial risks by distorting the rebalancing process.
Languishing external demand due to halting growth in European countries, the largest export market of Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limits the growth of exports.
The fall in commodity prices, particularly in oil prices, due to the weak global demand is expected to improve the current account balance by restricting the aggregate spending on imports.
Meanwhile, on account of the lingering volatility in financial markets and the sluggish course of confidence indices, private final demand contributes to growth at moderate levels.
Therefore, it is expected that the projected recovery in economic activity will be gradual and aggregate demand developments will support the disinflation process.
In the case of an additional slowdown in external demand and a sizeable decline in global growth rates, the decrease in commodity prices will pull inflation down.
Nevertheless, domestic economic activity may witness notable adverse effects at the same time.
Under such circumstances, the Committee will employ policy tools to support the economy.
Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year coupled with the tight monetary stance continue to have a favorable effect on the core inflation trend.
Accordingly, the adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate developments on annual inflation is also tapering off.
Although high food prices delay the improvement in inflation, core inflation trends have displayed a marked decrease compared to the elevated levels in the first quarter.
In addition, the fall in commodity prices, especially in oil prices, has shown a favorable impact on inflation.
In the event that these new levels of oil prices prove to be largely permanent, this channel will support the projected disinflation process over the upcoming period.
Under the current monetary policy stance, the Committee anticipates that inflation will decline in line with the forecast presented in the Inflation Report throughout 2015, at a faster pace in the first half of the year.
Along with these positive developments in the inflation outlook, the currently elevated levels of inflation still continue to pose upside risks to medium-term expectations and the pricing behavior.
In the forthcoming period, inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping the yield curve flat, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Global financial markets have followed a volatile course recently.
It was stated that capital flows to emerging markets may continue to be volatile in 2015.
The ongoing uncertainty about the normalization of global monetary policies cause the global risk appetite and capital flows to be data-sensitive.
The Committee emphasized that the CBRT has a rich set of policy tools to use against an earlier-than-expected policy rate hike by the Fed.
Yet, with the global economic slowdown the normalization of monetary policies might be postponed.
In an environment of continued uncertainty over global financial markets and economic activity, it is crucial to support prudential borrowing to limit the accumulation of macrofinancial risks.
In this respect, the Committee pointed out the downward trend in long-term interest rates at the global level.
It was stated that this trend has been directing banks to use more long-term borrowing under current market circumstances.
The Committee members also stated that the implementation of the measures intended for discouraging short-term borrowing by the first quarter of 2015 will offer additional benefits for financial stability.
Developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
The Committee welcomed the development that the new Medium Term Program incorporates disinflation as one of the main objectives.
Moreover, it was indicated that Turkey’s growth potential would increase gradually with the implementation of the recently announced structural transformation program.
Any measure to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In October, consumer prices increased by 1.90 percent and annual inflation edged up by 0.10 points to 8.96 percent.
The rise in annual inflation was mainly driven by the energy group due to the electricity and natural gas prices, and the contribution of food to annual inflation remained high.
The relatively favorable course of underlying core goods inflation continued, whereas the services category remained on the rise.
Annual food inflation fell by 1.4 percentage points to 12.56 percent.
This fall was mainly led by the unprocessed food group, particularly fresh fruits and vegetables, whereas annual processed food inflation increased.
The seasonally-adjusted data pointed to a correction in September and October in unprocessed food prices, albeit limited, and the group’s annual inflation remained elevated.
Indicators for November signal for a possible increase in the annual food inflation due to fruits and vegetables.
Owing to the adjustment in the electricity and natural gas tariffs, annual energy inflation rose by 3 points to 4.43 percent in October.
However, the declining oil prices poses a downside pressure on the group’s inflation, particularly through the fuel and bottled gas prices.
In fact, indicators for November suggest a notable fall in the annual energy inflation and sustained favorable contribution of the group to the consumer inflation.
Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.5 points to 8.95 percent in October.
Annual inflation, which has been on the decline in durable goods since May, recorded a decrease also in core goods excluding durables and clothing after a long time, indicating that the exchange rate effects have been quite alleviated.
On the other hand, prices of services rose by 0.61 percent in October and annual services inflation edged up by 0.2 points to 9.17 percent.
Annual inflation remained elevated in restaurants and hotels, and maintained the upward trend in transport services and rent groups.
A noticeable improvement was witnessed in core goods inflation following the first quarter, while the underlying trend of services inflation remained high.
Data for the third-quarter of 2014 show a more benign economic outlook than in the second quarter.
Industrial production grew by 1.7 percent in September on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Thus, industrial production rose by 1.5 percent quarter-on- quarter.
This recovery in production is expected to continue with the support of domestic demand.
Data on the expenditure side point to a moderate recovery in domestic private demand for the third quarter after the first-half decline.
In this period, the production of consumer goods rose on the back of durable goods, while the fall in the imports of consumer goods ended.
The sales of automobiles and home appliances recovered markedly thanks to more favorable financial conditions.
However, indicators for private investment demand display a weaker outlook.
The production of capital goods picked up from the second quarter whereas imports of capital goods went down.
An indicator for construction investments, the production of minerals continued to decline, albeit more modestly, while construction employment remained weak.
As a consequence, private construction investments are expected to slow slightly in the third quarter.
Overall, private consumer spending is expected to rebound in this period whereas private investment demand may remain on a more moderate path.
Survey indicators for the fourth quarter suggest that the recovery may continue into the fourth quarter.
The PMI and the Business Tendency Survey, both leading indicators for production, gave positive signals for the fourth-quarter industrial production.
The domestic sales of automobiles increased in October, nearing the level in the final quarter of 2013.
As an indicator for investments, the firms’ expectation for fixed-capital investments has been associated with positive signals for the past two months.
Yet, it is too early to declare that this development hints at a permanent recovery for investments in the upcoming period.
Meanwhile, the weak consumer confidence in October added to the downside risks on consumption.
The rise in total and nonfarm unemployment stopped in August in seasonally adjusted terms.
After falling in previous periods, nonfarm employment rose in August, while labor force participation continued to increase.
Construction and industrial employment began to rise again in line with the recent economic recovery.
Meanwhile, services employment continues to grow steadily.
Leading indicators for the final quarter signal a modest growth in nonfarm employment and a flattening in the unemployment rate.
The low levels of investment tendency and the weak external demand suggest that the recovery in the labor market may take some time.
To sum up, domestic demand is expected to make more contribution to growth while economic activity is likely to recover moderately in the second half of the year.
However, the uncertainty surrounding global monetary policies, the slowing yet continued financial volatility and the weak consumer confidence put downside pressure on economic activity.
Against this background, demand conditions are expected to continue to limit the upside pressures on inflation.
The Committee indicated that the recent fall in market rates and risk premiums had an expansionary effect on financial conditions.
However, the tight monetary stance and the macroprudential measures kept loan growth rates at reasonable levels.
This loan outlook and the composition not only limit medium-term inflationary pressures but also support the improvement in the current account balance.
Global demand remains weak, while the contribution of domestic demand to growth is increasing.
The second half of the year saw some recovery in private consumption and private machinery-equipment demand.
In this period, contribution of exports to annual growth rate has moderated, largely due to the global economic slowdown.
Despite this change in growth composition, the moderate course of consumer loans and the favorable changes in the terms of trade may contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
The macroprudential measures adopted in early 2014 and the tight monetary stance continue to have a positive impact on the core inflation trend.
Although elevated food prices delay the improvement in inflation, underlying inflation has displayed a marked decrease in core goods during recent months.
Falling commodity prices, in particular declining oil prices, are expected to support the disinflation process foreseen for the next year.
On the other hand, the current elevated levels of services inflation and the medium- term expectations suggest that risks related to pricing behavior are still prevalent.
The Committee will closely monitor inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation, and maintain a tight monetary policy stance by keeping a flat yield curve until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
The Committee anticipates that, under the current monetary policy stance, inflation will decline throughout 2015 in line with the forecast presented in the Inflation Report.
The meeting also involved a discussion of the importance of prudent borrowing against global risks.
The ongoing uncertainty about the normalization of global monetary policies cause the global risk appetite and capital flows to be data- sensitive.
Yet, Europe and Japan have announced new monetary expansion packages recently, and the economic slowdown might postpone the normalization of global monetary policies.
Thus, a scenario in which global interest rates remain low for a long time while uncertainties over global economy persist gains prominence.
As materialization of such a scenario would cause a surge in over-borrowing, it is crucial to support prudential borrowing to limit the accumulation of macrofinancial risks in the upcoming period.
In this respect, the staff briefed the Committee about the possible measures that would encourage the extension of maturities for non-core liabilities.
The Committee welcomed the development that the new Medium Term Program incorporates the fight against inflation as one of the main objectives.
In September, consumer prices increased by 0.14 percent and annual inflation declined to 8.86 percent.
The fall in annual inflation was mainly attributed to the positive outlook on core goods and energy while the contribution of food to annual inflation remained high.
For the underlying inflation trend, the improvement in the core goods continues to some extent whereas the services category remains on the rise.
Annual food inflation fell to 13.95 percent.
In September, annual inflation dropped in both unprocessed and processed food but remained elevated due to adverse weather conditions and the cumulative effects of exchange rates.
However, indicators for October point to some decline in annual unprocessed food inflation.
Falling to 1.38 percent in September, annual energy inflation contribute favorably to consumer inflation.
Having decreased due to the weakening global demand, international oil prices are expected to continue to support this outlook.
Yet, the October adjustments on natural gas and electricity tariffs are likely to drive energy prices significantly higher.
These hikes are forecasted to add about 0.4 percentage points to annual consumer inflation.
Prices of services rose by 0.9 percent in September and annual services inflation remained constant around 8.96 percent.
In this period, restaurants and hotels inflation maintained its high level with 14.43 percent, while transport and rent inflation maintained their upward trend that has been accelerating in recent months.
Annual core goods inflation dropped to 9.42 percent in this period.
Annual inflation continued to fall in durable goods but rose further, albeit more slowly, in core goods Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr excluding durables and clothing, which are affected by the exchange rate developments with a further lag.
In line with the outlook on prices of services and core goods, underlying core inflation indicators continued to improve.
In sum, elevated food prices delay the improvement in the inflation outlook, yet falling commodity, especially oil, prices, are expected to support disinflation foreseen for the next year.
Data for the third-quarter of 2014 show a moderate quarter-on-quarter increase in economic activity.
On the production side, the industrial production index decreased by 1.4 percent in August after growing by 1.9 percent in July.
Thus, during July-August, production rose by 1.1 percent quarter-on-quarter.
With the support of exports, this outlook is expected to be preserved in September as well.
During July-August, the production of durable and nondurable consumer goods and imports of total consumer goods recorded increases.
Similarly, the sales of automobiles and home appliances have picked up on the back of more favorable financial conditions.
Among indicators for machinery-equipment investments, the production of investment goods excluding transport rose during July-August while their imports decreased.
Meanwhile, the production of minerals, an indicator for construction investments, declined whereas their imports continued to rise.
Given the fall in construction employment, it is assessed that private construction investments have slowed in the third quarter.
Thus, private consumer spending is expected to rebound quarter-on- quarter whereas private investment demand may continue its weak course in the third quarter.
On the other hand, data on third-quarter budget spending indicate that public demand might support growth in the third quarter.
In August, the non-gold import index nearly flattened out month-on-month while the non-gold export index was down by 7.9 percent due to geopolitical tensions and the automotive industry’s August holiday scheme.
Indicators for September point to a monthly fall in non-gold imports and to a rise in non-gold exports due to increased exports to Iraq and the pickup in the automotive industry compensating for the August decline.
Hence, non-gold imports may post a slight quarterly increase in the third quarter of the year, whereas non-gold exports will remain flat.
Moreover, it is assessed that weak global demand and geopolitical risks might continue to limit the contribution of net exports to growth in the final quarter.
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr 9.
In July, total and nonfarm unemployment rates were higher than in the previous period in seasonally adjusted terms.
The rise in unemployment was largely due to weak outlook in non-farm employment.
Yet the increase in labor force participation is marked.
In this period, the downtrend in construction employment halted, while losses in industrial employment persisted.
Meanwhile, services employment continued to support nonfarm employment.
Leading indicators for the third quarter fail to signal a positive outlook for nonfarm employment.
The low levels of investment tendency and the moderate growth in industrial production suggest that a recovery in the labor market may take some time.
To sum up, third-quarter data indicate that private domestic demand recovered modestly.
As suggested by surveys, the moderate recovery of domestic demand may continue into the final quarter.
However, a possible slowdown across European economies and geopolitical tensions may cause external demand to weaken.
Therefore, economic activity is expected to grow moderately and gradually in the second half of the year.
On the other hand, uncertainty over global monetary policies, the recent increase of volatility in financial markets and the weak consumer and investor confidence pose downside risks on growth.
Thus, demand conditions are expected to limit the upside pressures on inflation while domestic demand developments will support the improvement in current account balance.
The Committee assessed the medium-term forecasts projected to be included in the October Inflation Report.
Due to the negative supply-side developments, food prices remained elevated in the third quarter of 2014, which led the annual consumer inflation to exceed the forecasts presented in July Inflation Report.
Upon the evaluation of assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and external conditions, given the developments in import and oil prices, food prices, energy price adjustments, output gap and the underlying inflation trend, year-end inflation forecasts for 2014 and 2015 were revised upwards.
Global financial markets have recently followed a volatile course.
While, the Fed terminated its quantitative easing program, the timing and magnitude of the policy rate increase remained uncertain.
The ECB reduced policy rates against the risks of economic slowdown and deflation and announced a new quantitative easing program through the purchase of covered bonds and asset-backed securities.
Persisting uncertainties regarding global monetary policies and the downturn in global economic activity may lead to volatility in capital inflows towards emerging economies as well as their risk indicators.
The Committee stated that the reduction in Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr interest rates on the foreign exchange deposits that banks can borrow from the CBRT within their borrowing limits in the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market would support balanced growth and continuity of capital inflows towards Turkey during the normalization of global monetary policies.
In addition, it is important to further strengthen the current healthy structure of the banking sector.
Accordingly, the Committee stated that introducing an additional support to the core liabilities of financial institutions through remuneration of required reserves which are held in Turkish lira would spur balanced growth and domestic savings.
Elevated food prices delay the improvement in the inflation outlook.
Unfavorable developments in food prices were mainly driven by supply conditions.
Should supply conditions make no additional negative contribution in 2015, and food inflation near its averages of past years, there will be a considerable room for decline in inflation through this channel.
Due to the recently-weakening global demand, falling commodity prices, oil in particular, are expected to support the disinflation process projected for 2015.
In contrast to these positive developments in the inflation outlook, the current elevated levels of inflation affect the medium-term expectations adversely and boost risks related to pricing behavior.
Growth rates and composition of loans evolve in the desired direction, owing to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
Consumer loan growth followed a weak course, while commercial loan growth was relatively more robust.
This favorable outlook of loans both contributes to disinflation and support rebalancing of the current account.
Additional tightening measures will be taken should credit growth accelerate in a way that poses upside risks to inflation and aggravates financial risks by distorting the rebalancing process.
Recently-released data point to a deceleration in economic activity.
An overall slowdown in growth in the global economy has been observed in the second and third quarters of 2014.
Languishing external demand due to halting growth in the European countries, the largest export market of Turkey, besides geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limit the growth of exports.
Falling commodity prices due to the weak global demand are expected to restrict growth in imports and improve the current account balance.
Meanwhile, on account of the lingering volatility in financial markets and the sluggish course of confidence indices, private sector final demand does not exhibit a steady recovery.
Therefore, it is expected that the projected recovery in economic activity will be gradual and Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr aggregate demand developments will support the disinflation process.
Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year coupled with the tight monetary stance have a favorable effect on the core inflation trend.
Having significantly increased in early 2014, trend of core inflation indicators H and I have recently improved and most of the rise in inflation trend was taken back by the third quarter.
Accordingly, the adverse impact of exchange rate developments on annual inflation is tapering off.
This channel is assessed to provide inflation with a considerable room for decline in 2015.
However, second-round effects and inflation expectations need to be closely monitored.
In the event that additional deteriorations occur in the medium-term inflation outlook, liquidity and monetary policies would be tightened.
The Committee closely monitors developments on the fiscal policy and tax adjustments with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
The baseline monetary stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes on administered prices in the forthcoming period.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
Strengthening structural reforms that will ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability in the medium term.
Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for maneuvering the monetary policy and improving social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In this respect, implementing the structural reforms required by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr
In August, consumer prices were up 0.09 percent and annual inflation increased by 0.22 points to 9.54 percent.
This increase in annual inflation was driven primarily by prices of food and services groups.
The contribution of food and catering services groups to annual inflation reached 4.4 percentage points in this period.
The underlying trend of services inflation increased, whereas the improving trend in core goods became evident on the back of the fading cumulative effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Annual food inflation edged up to 14.44 percent.
In August, annual inflation increased to 16.06 percent in unprocessed food and reached 13.15 percent in processed food.
This increase has been determined by both supply-side constraints due to adverse weather conditions and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Given this outlook, the group’s inflation bears the risk to remain elevated for a while.
Prices of services rose by 0.92 percent month-on-month, bringing annual services inflation up to 8.96 percent.
In this period, annual inflation followed a rising trend across most subcategories of services.
In tandem with food inflation, annual inflation in restaurants and hotels remained on the rise and reached 14.73 percent.
Thus, having hovered around 8 percent since the start of 2014, services inflation rose approximately by 1 percentage points within the year.
The underlying trend of services inflation continued with increasing figures, curbing the improvement in core indices.
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr 4.
Receding to 2.94 percent, the annual increase in energy prices contributed favorably to consumer inflation.
However, the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira poses an upside risk to energy group inflation.
Meanwhile, declining international energy prices in line with weakening global demand are thought to limit the upside risks.
Annual core goods inflation fell to 10.37 percent in August.
Due to varying lags in the exchange rate pass-through among subcategories, annual inflation figures continued to decouple in sub-groups.
Accordingly, annual inflation remained on the decline in durable goods, the prices of which have decreased since May, in contrast to the persisting rise in core goods excluding durables and clothing, which are affected by the exchange rate developments with a lag.
Supported also by the higher- than-expected discount in clothing prices compared to recent years’ averages, the seasonally adjusted data revealed a sustained improvement in the underlying trend in core goods inflation.
In sum, adverse effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira since mid-2013 are gradually waning.
However, the Committee assessed that elevated food prices continue to delay the improvement in the inflation outlook.
Second-quarter GDP data point to sluggish economic activity compared to the outlook announced in the July Inflation Report.
In this period, the increasing sentiment of uncertainty due to international developments and the slowing global growth led to a weaker-than-expected performance for consumer demand and exports, respectively.
On the other hand, net exports continued to make positive contribution to annual growth.
Third-quarter data show a moderate quarterly increase in economic activity.
On the production side, the Industrial Production Index grew by 1.8 percent in July, both month-on-month and quarter-on-quarter.
However, due to shifting holidays and the automotive industry’s holiday scheme, production may experience some volatility in August and September, resulting in a more modest quarterly production growth.
Data on the expenditure side point to a moderate recovery in domestic private demand in the third quarter.
In July, the production of consumer goods was higher than the second-quarter average.
Among indicators for the durable-goods demand, imports of durable goods declined, whereas the July-August average for the production of durable goods and the sales of automobiles and home appliances Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr reveals a quarterly growth.
The production and imports of investment goods excluding transport, an indicator for machinery-equipment investments, picked up.
Among indicators for construction investments, the production of minerals decreased while their imports continued to rise.
Meanwhile, data on July-August budget spending indicate that public demand might support growth in the third quarter.
Exports remain supportive of balanced growth in spite of weakening global demand.
The non-gold export and import indices were up by a monthly 4.2 and 3.3 percent, respectively, in July.
Indicators for August point to a fall in non-gold exports month-on-month due to geopolitical tensions and the automotive industry, and to a rise in non-gold imports.
Geopolitical tensions and the waning global demand, particularly across Europe, are expected to put further pressure on external demand for some time.
Thus, exports may provide less support to growth in the upcoming period than in the first half of the year.
In June, unemployment rates were higher quarter-on-quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.
The rise in unemployment was largely due to a weaker non-farm employment.
While labor force continued to grow, non-farm employment declined slightly during May-June because of losses in construction and industrial employment.
On the other hand, services employment remains on the rise.
Leading indicators for the third quarter point to a stagnant outlook for employment.
In sum, private demand is expected to recover modestly and gradually on the back of less tight financial conditions and waning domestic uncertainties.
However, the weakening global demand, the uncertainty over global monetary policies and the lack of a strong and steady recovery in consumer and investor confidence add to the downside risks to growth.
The Committee stated that the recent growth rate and the composition of loans evolve in the desired direction, owing to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
The annual growth rate of consumer loans remain at low levels, while commercial loan growth is relatively more robust.
The current outlook in loans not only contains medium-term inflation pressures but also supports the improvement in the current account balance.
Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr 14.
In line with these developments, the private sector demand is expected to follow a mild and gradual growth path after the slowdown in the second quarter.
Exports, on the other hand, continue to support balanced growth in spite of the weakening global demand.
Accordingly, it is believed that demand developments will not pose an upward pressure on inflation in the coming period, while supply-side factors will affect the course of inflation.
Macroprudential measures taken at the beginning of the year and the tight monetary policy stance started to have favorable impact on the core inflation trend.
Having soared in early 2014, trend of core inflation indicators H and I have recently improved and most of the rise in inflation trend was taken back by August.
Accordingly, the adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate developments on annual inflation is tapering off as well.
The Committee highlighted that there is a considerable room for decline in inflation in 2015 through this channel.
However, it was also underlined that second round effects and the recent volatility in exchange rates should be closely monitored.
Elevated food prices continue to delay the improvement in the inflation outlook.
The Committee noted that domestic food prices have diverged negatively from international food prices in recent months.
It is also suggested that the fall in commodity prices, driven by slowing global demand, might contain upside risks to inflation.
The current elevated levels of inflation affect medium-term expectations adversely and boost risks related to pricing behavior.
The Committee will closely monitor inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation and maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping a flat yield curve until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Uncertainty regarding global monetary policies has continued to prevail in financial markets recently.
While ending quantitative easing, the U.S. Federal Reserve stated that it would keep policy rates low for a considerable time.
Moreover, the expectations of the level that policy rates will reach in the long run is lower than the pre-crisis level.
In this context, the Committee was briefed on limits, interest rates and past implementations of Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets-Foreign Exchange Deposit Market.
The European Central Bank has recently cut policy rates against the risks of economic slowdown and deflation and announced a quantitative easing program.
Although such policies may lead to more capital flows into emerging markets, the volatility in capital flows persists.
For the purposes of financial stability, it is important to further strengthen the current healthy state of the banking sector.
In this context, the Committee was Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası (Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey) Head Office İstiklal Caddesi 10 06100 Ulus / Ankara 0312 507 50 00 www.tcmb.gov.tr informed about the preparations on remunerating the Turkish lira portion of required reserves, on a basis to encourage improving the deposit and equity ratios of the banking sector.
In July, consumer prices were up 0.45 percent and annual inflation increased by 0.16 points to 9.32 percent.
This increase in annual inflation was driven primarily by prices of services, alcoholic beverages and tobacco, while the high course of food prices continued in this period.
The underlying trend of services inflation remained elevated, whereas the trend in core goods continued to improve on the back of the fading cumulative effects of the Turkish lira depreciation.
Food inflation edged up to 12.56 percent year-on-year.
In July, annual inflation declined to 12.1 percent in unprocessed food and reached 13 percent in processed food.
Although the headline food inflation was relatively flat in this period, the annual rate of increase in food prices excluding fresh fruits and vegetables rose to 15.2 percent.
This was mostly attributed to drought-related supply issues.
Down to 3.74 percent, the annual increase of energy prices continued to contribute favorably to consumer inflation.
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco products added 0.12 points to annual consumer inflation due to increased prices of some cigarette brands.
Prices of services surged by 1.20 percent month-on-month, bringing annual services inflation up by 0.44 points to 8.62 percent.
In this period, annual inflation was up across all subcategories of services.
In particular, the annual inflation in restaurants and hotels continued to rise in line with food inflation.
Therefore, the underlying trend of services inflation soared, curbing the improvement in core indices.
Annual core goods inflation fell to 11 percent in July.
After declining in May and June, prices of durable goods remained flat in July, driving annual durable goods inflation further down.
However, annual inflation continued to rise in core goods excluding durables that respond with a lag to the exchange rate pass-through.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, the underlying trend in core goods inflation continued to improve in this period.
Second-quarter data point to a continued moderate growth in economic activity.
On the production side, the industrial production index recovered its April rise in May and increased modestly in June.
Thus, production remained flat during the second quarter.
On the spending front, domestic private final demand displays a moderate course.
The production of consumer goods was higher quarter-on-quarter, whereas the imports of consumer goods were down from the previous quarter.
A similar divergence was noted in the consumption demand for durable and nondurable goods.
Automobile sales, an indicator for the durable goods demand, picked up moderately in the second quarter after the first-quarter plunge, and posted a rapid increase in July.
Sales of home appliances, on the other hand, increased in the second quarter after a two-quarter slowdown.
Thus, it is anticipated that the demand for nondurable goods registered a mild increase in the second quarter and the fall in the demand for durable goods may have halted.
Meanwhile, indicators for machinery and equipment investments suggest that investments remain weak.
Moreover, indicators for construction investments do not show any recovery at this point.
Recent data suggest that the contribution of exports to growth may decrease in the upcoming period.
The non-gold export volume index posted a monthly decline in June for the first time in a long while due to the geopolitical tensions in Iraq, Turkey’s second largest export destination, as well as due to the slowing economic activity in the euro area.
These factors are likely to continue to put downside pressure on external demand for some time.
In fact, leading indicators signal some slowdown in exports for the third quarter of the year.
In seasonally adjusted terms, total and nonfarm unemployment rates were higher in May 2014 than in the previous period.
The rise in unemployment rates was largely due to the slowing nonfarm employment.
In this period, industrial employment remained unchanged from the previous month, while construction employment declined.
Moreover, the rate of increase in services employment slowed.
Leading indicators for the third quarter signal no significant recovery for employment.
The low levels of investment tendency suggest that a recovery in the labor market may take some time.
In sum, domestic demand remains moderate while external demand loses momentum.
Thus, economic activity is expected to have flattened in the second quarter after the robust quarterly growth in the first quarter.
Survey indicators suggest that economic activity will remain moderate in the third quarter as well.
Therefore, demand developments are not expected to put pressure on inflation in the upcoming period.
Meanwhile, the improvement in the current account deficit may decelerate to some extent due to the slowdown in external demand growth.
The Committee assessed that the recent growth rate and the composition of loans evolve in the desired direction, owing to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
Annual rate of growth in consumer loans continue to decrease, while commercial loan growth is relatively more robust.
The current pace and composition of loans not only contain medium-term inflation pressures but also support the improvement in the current account balance.
The Committee stated that the partial easing in financial conditions besides the decline in domestic uncertainties may affect the credit market positively in the upcoming period.
Meanwhile, food prices surging amid drought coupled with the ongoing geopolitical risks may limit the increase in the consumer confidence and the credit demand in the short term.
The adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate developments since mid-2013 on annual inflation is gradually tapering off.
Having exceeded 3 percentage points in April, these effects are estimated to ease to around 2.5 percentage points as of July.
The Committee highlighted that there is a considerable room for decline in inflation through this channel in 2015.
However, it was also underlined that second round effects of the exchange rate pass-through should be closely monitored.
The high course of food prices delays the improvement in the inflation outlook.
In this respect, the Committee also evaluated the possible impact of the drought and the geopolitical risks on the inflation outlook.
The Committee underlined that domestic food prices had recently decoupled from those abroad in a negative way.
The food group has seen marked price increases since the start of the year, and no apparent correction is expected in the short term, partly due to the geopolitical risks.
Given that the current elevated levels of inflation affect the medium-term expectations adversely and add on the risks to the pricing behavior, all relevant institutions’ involvement with the fight against inflation is deemed crucial for macroeconomic stability.
In this scope, it was mentioned that an active foreign trade policy might be helpful in containing risks to food prices.
In line with these assessments, the Committee decided to maintain the current stance regarding short-term interest rates.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Accordingly, the Committee reminded that the liquidity policy may be used actively when needed.
The Committee highlighted that long-term interest rates had recently become less volatile amid the alleviation of uncertainties regarding global monetary policies.
Coupled with unwinding domestic uncertainties, this has partially eased the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to reduce the overnight lending rate to render the interest rate corridor more symmetric.
In June, consumer prices increased by 0.31 percent and annual inflation declined to 9.16 percent.
This decrease in annual inflation was driven primarily by food prices, but also by energy and services prices.
In this period, the cumulative effects of the Turkish lira depreciation continued to weaken and the uptrend that started in the annual core goods inflation in early January stopped.
Thus, the annual inflation in core indicators followed a relatively flat course.
Annual food group inflation fell by 1.6 points to 12.47 percent, mainly on the back of the unprocessed food group whose annual inflation decreased by 4.4 points due to base effects, while the introduction of new fresh fruits to the index limited the decline in the group’s inflation.
On the processed food front, rapid increases prevailed across all subcategories, particularly in bread and cereals, and annual inflation rose to 12.2 percent.
The elevated food prices have been the main factor limiting the pace of decline in inflation.
In fact, excluding the food group, the underlying consumer inflation trend has been slowing.
On the other hand, the energy group continued to contribute favorably to consumer inflation with an annual increase of 4.25 percent.
Prices of services rose by 0.88 percent in June, and the group’s annual inflation edged down by 0.34 points to 8.18 percent.
Annual inflation in restaurants-hotels, rents and transport were up in this period, while the decline in inflation was mainly driven by the base effect from driving school fees.
Seasonally adjusted data point to a slowing yet still high underlying services inflation trend for June.
Annual core goods inflation remained flat at 11.4 percent in June.
Following the appreciation of the Turkish lira during April-May, prices of durable goods dropped for the second consecutive month, and the group’s annual inflation continued to decrease.
Meanwhile, prices of core goods excluding durable goods, which witness the effects of the exchange rate with a further lag, remained on the rise.
Accordingly, the exchange rate-driven inflationary pressures on the core goods group continued to subside.
In fact, June’s seasonally adjusted data suggest a notable improvement in the underlying core goods inflation.
Data for the second quarter of 2014 point to a moderate increase in economic activity.
On the production side, the industrial production index declined by 1 percent in May after the 0.9 percent increase in April.
The drop in May’s production was largely due to the sharp month-on-month fall in the production of capital goods.
In May, the production of durable goods decreased slightly, whereas the production of nondurable goods rose, and the production of intermediate goods was flat.
Thus, production remained unchanged during April-May.
The upcoming period is expected to witness an ongoing modest rise in production with the support of exports and a rebound in domestic demand.
Among the indicators of nondurable consumption demand, the production of nondurable goods increased quarter-on-quarter during April-May, whereas the imports of nondurable goods were down quarter-on-quarter.
The production and imports of durable goods were up quarterly during April-May.
Among indicators of durable goods demand, sales of automobiles were flat in the second quarter following the first-quarter plunge, while sales of home appliances registered an increase during April-May after a two-quarter slowdown.
Thus, it is considered that the uptrend in the demand for nondurable goods continued in the second quarter and that the fall in the demand for durable goods may have halted.
Indicators for machinery- equipment suggest that investments remain weak.
Indicators for construction investments show that the increase in construction investments continued at a decelerating pace in the second quarter.
With the decrease in uncertainty, the improved confidence indices and the declining volatility in the Turkish lira, consumption demand is expected to help domestic demand recover in the second half of 2014.
This recovery is projected to be gradual and mild due to the tight monetary stance and macroprudential measures.
Exports continued to expand in the second quarter amid recovering external demand and contributed favorably to growth.
Having increased slightly month- on-month in May, the non-gold export volume index surpassed the average of the previous quarter during April-May.
Due to the modest global recovery signaled by recent survey indicators and the improving world trade, exports are envisaged to support growth further in the upcoming period.
Yet, the geopolitical tensions in Iraq may pose downside risks on economic activity and the current account balance.
The ongoing upsurge in employment since November 2013 lost pace during March-April and seasonally adjusted unemployment rates followed a flat course.
Construction employment fell in this period, while industrial employment remained unchanged and non-farm employment rose on the back of the services sector.
Leading indicators for the second quarter point to a mild increase in employment.
The Committee assessed the medium-term forecasts to be included in the July Inflation Report.
In the second quarter of 2014, the inflation excluding food was consistent with the April forecasts.
Yet, the continued upsurge in food prices due to negative supply-side developments caused annual consumer inflation to remain above the forecast.
The Committee stated that no major update was made to the assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and external conditions.
Under the assumption that the upside risks to food prices are contained, the end-2014 inflation forecast of the April Inflation Report was left unchanged.
Due to tight monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures, loan growth rates remain at reasonable levels.
In the first half of the year, consumer loan growth fell well below its average of recent years, while commercial loan growth was relatively more robust.
The Committee concluded that this favorable growth composition of loans both contribute to the disinflation and supported the rebalancing by curbing private final demand.
In line with these developments, domestic private final demand displays a modest outlook.
Meanwhile, with the help of the recovery in foreign demand, exports contribute positively to economic growth.
The Committee expects that such a demand composition will support disinflation and will lead to a significant improvement in the current account balance in 2014.
Recent geopolitical developments, on the other hand, may pose downside risks to growth and balancing process directly due to the trade channel as well as the oil price channel.
In addition, rise in oil prices may bear adverse effects on inflation.
The adverse impact of exchange rate developments since mid-2013 on annual inflation is gradually tapering off.
Indeed, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators has recently displayed a decline amid the alleviation of inflationary pressures led by the exchange rate particularly on durable goods.
However, the high course of food prices due to supply-side developments in recent times limited the pace of decline in inflation.
The committee stated that given the falling prices in international agricultural products in the second quarter, an active foreign trade policy for these products might curb upside risks to food prices.
Recently, the Fed has stated that accommodative policies would be maintained for a long time and lowered the long-term interest rate expectations, which had a positive effect on the markets.
In addition, the ECB reduced the policy rates and announced a new quantitative easing program, boosting the global risk appetite.
These developments led to expansionary effects on global liquidity conditions, and capital inflows towards emerging economies saw a recovery.
The Committee decided to deliver a measured cut in the one-week repo rate amid the fall in underlying inflation trend excluding food and improvement in global liquidity conditions.
Emerging economies, including Turkey, saw an increase in portfolio inflows in recent months, reversing the outflows occurring since mid-2013.
The mild global growth outlook and the favorable conditions for risk appetite are expected to further support capital flows to emerging economies in the upcoming period.
Accordingly, should capital inflows accelerate; steps may be taken to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
Committee was also informed about the need for a technical change in the exchange rate composition of the Reserve Option Mechanism.
The Committee closely monitors developments on fiscal policy and tax adjustments with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
In May, consumer prices edged up by 0.40 percent month-on-month, and annual inflation reached 9.66 percent.
This uptick in annual inflation was driven by the course of food and core goods prices.
In this period, cumulative effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira waned and the annual rate of increase in core inflation indicators followed a relatively flat course.
Annual food group inflation climbed by 1 percentage points to 14.11 percent amid soaring prices of unprocessed food group, the annual inflation of which reached 17.1 percent.
On the processed food front, prices of bread and cereals continued with an upsurge, while the uptrend in other processed food products lost pace.
As of May, the contribution of food prices to annual consumer inflation reached 3.4 percentage points.
On the other hand, energy prices continued with a relatively favorable path with an annual increase of 4.62 percent.
Prices of services rose by 0.67 percent month-on-month, and the group’s annual inflation edged down to 8.52 percent in May.
Annual inflation in restaurants-hotels and rents recorded an increase contrary to the decline in other sub-items of services.
The seasonally adjusted data point to a downward trend, yet persisting high levels in the underlying trend of services inflation.
Annual core goods inflation crept up by 0.29 percentage points to 11.39 percent in May.
Following the appreciation in the April-May period, prices of durable consumer goods registered a month-on-month decline for the first time since the start of the year.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in core goods, excluding durable goods remained on the rise, witnessing the effects of the exchange rate with a further lag.
The seasonally-adjusted data indicated a slight improvement in the underlying trend of the core goods inflation.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data for the first quarter of 2014 proved broadly consistent with the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report.
The public sector compensated for the fall in private sector demand, leading the final domestic demand to follow a flat course.
Exports of goods and services continued to expand at a robust pace, while imports registered a quarterly decline.
Thus, net exports appeared as the main driver of quarterly growth in the first quarter, and the rebalancing process among demand components continued as projected.
Data for the first quarter of 2014 point to a moderate increase in economic activity.
On the production side, the industrial production index posted a month-on-month increase by 1.0 percent following a slight fall in the preceding two months.
Thus, production maintained a steady trend of quarterly increase by exceeding the average of the previous quarter in the April.
The upcoming period is expected to witness an ongoing modest rise in production with the support of exports and a rebound in the private domestic demand.
Data on the expenditure side exhibit a modest course in final private domestic demand in the second quarter.
Among the indicators of consumption demand, the production and exports of non-durable goods rose, whereas the imports thereof declined quarter-on-quarter in April.
Production and imports of durable goods recorded higher figures on a quarterly basis in April.
Among indicators of consumption of durable goods, sales of automobiles displayed a flat course following a plunge in the first quarter, while the sales of white goods recorded an increase in the April-May period following an interval of two quarters.
Thus, it is considered that the uptrend in the demand for non-durable goods continued in the second quarter, and that the fall in demand for durable goods may have halted.
Indicators of machinery-equipment investments point to a flat course in the second quarter.
Moreover, the data regarding construction investments show that the construction investments continued with a decelerating pace.
Owing to reduced perceptions of uncertainty, recovered confidence indices and improved financial conditions, consumption demand is projected to post better figures and final private domestic demand is expected to settle on a track of gradual increase starting from second quarter.
Recent data show that exports continued to grow in the second quarter of 2014 and contributed positively to growth owing also to the recovery in foreign demand.
Having increased month-on-month in April, the export volume index excluding gold went above the average of the previous quarter.
Due to the recent global recovery pointed by survey indicators and the improvement in world trade, exports are envisaged to support growth further in the upcoming period.
However, the geopolitical developments in Iraq pose downside risks regarding the contribution of exports to growth in the second quarter.
The ongoing upsurge in employment since November 2013 lost pace in March and seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates followed a flat course.
Industrial and construction employment paused in this period, while non-farm employment rose on the back of the services sector.
Leading indicators on the second quarter point to a mild increase in employment.
Loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
Consumer loans grew well below the historical averages in the first half of the year, while the deceleration in the growth of commercial loans remained relatively limited.
The Committee stated that by limiting excessive consumption, the current growth composition of loans not only curbed inflation but also supported rebalancing.
In line with these developments, recent data indicate a modest course in private final domestic demand.
The adverse impact of exchange rate developments since mid-2013 on annual inflation will taper off.
In fact, amid alleviated inflationary pressures stemming from the exchange rate, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators trended downwards particularly in durable goods for the first time after a long time in May.
With the contribution of base effects, inflation is expected to decline markedly starting from this month.
The Committee stated that the cumulative impact of food inflation and the exchange rate pass-through to annual headline inflation reached around 6.5 percentage points, which constitutes a considerable room for disinflation in the medium term.
Meanwhile, the Committee added that the effects of the ongoing high inflation rates on the pricing behavior needed to be closely monitored.
The meeting also involved a discussion on the probable impact of the recent geopolitical developments on the current account balance and inflation.
It was assessed that should uncertainties persist in Iraq, exports and oil prices channels may lead to a slowdown in the rebalancing process.
Similarly, it was mentioned that if higher energy prices persist, it may lead to a limited impact on inflation.
The Committee stated that providing a monetary policy reaction to the geopolitical uncertainties at this stage would not be appropriate; yet these developments should be closely monitored.
In the light of these assessments and the recent improvement in global liquidity conditions, the Committee decided to deliver a measured cut in the one-week repo rate.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping a flat yield curve until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
In April, consumer prices rose by 1.34 percent month-on-month, and annual inflation increased by 1 percentage points to 9.38 percent.
This uptick in annual inflation was particularly driven by food prices.
Meanwhile, the lagged effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira continued to affect core inflation indicators adversely through the core goods channel.
Annual food group inflation climbed to 13.15 percent amid soaring prices of fruits in April, contrary to their moderate course in the first quarter.
The rise in the annual processed food inflation remained comparatively limited.
Prices of services edged up by 0.55 percent month-on-month, and the group’s annual inflation remained flat at 8.61 percent.
The persisting rise in the prices of catering services (restaurants-hotels) due to the developments in the food group excluding fruits and vegetables lost pace compared to the first quarter.
Annual inflation in rents, transport and communication services exhibited a relatively mild course in this period, while other services (particularly health and education) posted rising figures.
The seasonally adjusted data point to persisting high levels in the underlying trend of services inflation in this period without any further acceleration.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 1.06 percentage points to 11.10 percent in April.
With the effect of accumulated depreciation in the Turkish lira, the annual inflation in durable consumer goods reached 15.87 percent.
In this group, price increases in automobiles and white goods decelerated in contrast to the upsurge in furniture prices.
Meanwhile, clothing prices rose above seasonal averages in April and the group’s annual inflation reached 7.61 percent.
April developments indicate that the effects of the exchange rate waned in some groups, yet spread across the core goods group.
Accordingly, core goods became the main driver of the rise in the underlying trend of the core inflation.
On the production side, following the rise in January, the industrial production index posted a slight fall in February and March.
Thus, production maintained a steady trend of quarterly increase by exceeding the average of the previous quarter by 1.4 percent in the first quarter.
The upcoming period is expected to witness an ongoing rise in production with the support of exports and modest course in the domestic demand.
Data on expenditure side show that private demand weakened in the first quarter due to developments in the consumption of durable goods and the investment of private machinery-equipment.
On the other hand, data on the consumption of nondurable goods and construction investments remain favorable.
Among subcategories of imports of consumption goods, imports of automobiles plunged, while imports of durable and semi-durable goods fell moderately and imports of non-durable goods continued to rise in the first quarter.
In this period, the production of durable goods was down from the previous quarter, whereas the production of nondurable goods remained on the rise.
Among the indicators of machinery-equipment investments, the production and imports of investment goods excluding transport declined.
Moreover, the data regarding construction investments show that the increase in construction investments continued.
With the support of recovery in consumption demand thanks to reduced perceptions of uncertainty, improved confidence indices, and appreciation in Turkish lira, the domestic demand is expected to settle on a track of gradual increase starting from second quarter.
Nevertheless, second-quarter CBRT Business Tendency Survey (BTS), PMI, loans and imports data suggest that this recovery will be moderate.
Recent data show that exports continued to grow in the first quarter of 2014.
The export volume index excluding gold rose again in March and hovered above its average in the previous quarter.
With the support of the global recovery signaled by recent survey indicators, and the pickup in international trade, exports are envisaged to follow a favorable path in the upcoming period.
PMI and BTS export indicators also support this outlook.
In seasonally adjusted terms, total and non-farm unemployment rates declined in February 2014.
This drop in unemployment rates was driven by the upsurge in non-farm employment.
Furthermore, seasonally adjusted data regarding total employment expectations, a BTS indicator, maintain its trend of favorable outlook.
In sum, recent data releases indicate that the private final domestic demand will follow a modest course, and with the help of the recovery in foreign demand, net exports will contribute positively to growth.
It is expected that the current outlook in demand components will curb inflationist pressures and support the improvement in the current account deficit.
Owing to the significant decline in uncertainties about the Fed’s asset purchases recently coupled with the recovery in global growth, the risk sentiment improved across global financial markets.
Along with these developments, emerging economies saw limited amounts of portfolio inflows after a long while.
Risk indicators, which deteriorated in times of elevated country-specific risks in Turkey, recovered due to the waning domestic and external uncertainties.
With the recent decline in uncertainties and improvement in the risk premium indicators, market interest rates declined across all maturities.
In this regard, the Committee decided on a measured decrease in the one-week funding rate.
It is stated that, with a flat yield curve even after this decision, the monetary policy stance will continue to be tight.
The Committee closely monitors inflation expectations and the pricing behavior.
The slowdown in consumer loans and the weak private demand are expected to restrict the effect of the cost-push shocks on inflation in the coming period.
Moreover, thanks to the strong and front-loaded monetary tightening delivered in January and the recently-waned uncertainties, a considerable portion of the depreciation in the Turkish lira during the first quarter is reversed.
This development in the exchange rates is assessed to contribute favorably to the inflation outlook.
However, lagged effects of the exchange rate movements and the unfavorable course of food prices are likely to cause inflation to remain above the target for some time.
In the meantime, the Committee will closely monitor inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation and maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping the yield curve flat until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
The Committee stated that loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
Across subcategories, growth rates of consumer loans and credit cards exhibit a notable slowdown, while growth of commercial loans expand at a rate close to past years.
The Committee assessed that this positive development in loan growth composition will contribute to financial stability, the rebalancing process and the decrease in inflation.
In line with these developments, recent data indicate a modest course in the private final domestic demand.
Meanwhile, net exports are expected to contribute positively to economic growth thanks to the recovery in external demand, particularly from European countries, and real exchange rate developments.
The Committee expects that such a demand composition will support disinflation and will lead to a significant improvement in the current account deficit in 2014.
Although having faded to a great extent, the uncertainty about global monetary policies is yet to disappear.
Expectations about the timing and pace of the Fed’s rate hike are important to the pricing in financial markets.
However, the transmission mechanism of the interest rate channel is better known than the quantitative easing and the monetary policy dependence on high-frequency data has decreased.
As a result, it is assessed that the uncertainty effect of an interest rate hike on financial markets might be more limited than that of the exit from the quantitative easing program.
Moreover, the ECB’s possible quantitative easing might be another supporting factor for capital flows.
Hence, capital may start flowing back to emerging economies.
If this scenario materializes, the Central Bank might take steps to accumulate foreign exchange reserves.
In this respect, implementing the structural reforms required by the MTP remains to be of utmost importance.
In March, consumer prices rose by 1.13 percent month-on-month, and annual inflation increased by 0.5 points to 8.39 percent.
The lagged effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira continued to affect core inflation indicators adversely, particularly through the core goods channel.
This, along with the unfavorable course of food prices, will cause inflation indicators to remain high for some time.
Annual food group inflation increased slightly to 10.12 percent.
In the first quarter, fruit and vegetable prices were moderate, while food prices excluding this group were substantially unfavorable.
Especially processed food prices posted a sharp rise in the first three months of the year due to the depreciation of the Turkish lira and adverse weather conditions.
Owing to these effects, the annual food price inflation is expected to rise further in April.
Prices of services edged up by 0.65 percent month-on-month, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 0.26 points to 8.60 percent.
This was largely attributed to the dramatic increase in catering prices (restaurants-hotels) caused by the developments in food prices excluding fruit and vegetables.
Additionally, annual inflation in other services items excluding rents and transportation also increased.
The seasonally adjusted data point to an ongoing rise in the underlying trend of services inflation in this period as well.
Annual core goods inflation increased by a marked 1.64 points to 10.04 percent in March.
The annual inflation in durable consumer goods rising on the back of the Turkish lira depreciation reached 15 percent.
Meanwhile, clothing prices recorded the highest March increase in the history of the index.
This was mainly driven by cost and external demand related developments as well as the early launch of the new season.
March was marked by a strong exchange rate pass- through across the core goods group.
Accordingly, the seasonally-adjusted data pointed to a notable rise in the underlying trend of the core goods inflation.
Thus, core inflation indicators registered a negative outlook as well.
According to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data for the fourth quarter of 2013, economic activity was largely consistent with the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report.
In seasonally adjusted terms, GDP grew by 0.5 percent quarter-on-quarter, allowing economic activity to be more moderate in the second half of the year after a robust acceleration in the first half.
Final domestic demand increased at a more rapid pace after a weak second and third quarter.
Among final domestic demand components, private demand remained modest throughout 2013, while public demand followed a volatile path, thus determining the direction of domestic demand.
In the fourth quarter, exports increased at a faster pace than imports on a quarterly basis, and demand components moved in the direction of rebalancing compared to the first half of the year as expected.
Data for the first quarter of 2014 suggest that economic activity grew moderately.
On the production side, the industrial production index remained broadly unchanged month-on-month in February after registering a monthly 1.0 percent increase in January.
Thus, production was 1.7 percent higher from the previous quarter’s average during January-February and continued to grow steadily in quarterly terms.
In the upcoming period, production is expected to grow further on the back of exports and the modest domestic demand.
Data on spending show that private demand weakened in the first quarter due to developments in the consumption of durable goods and the private machinery-equipment.
Among subcategories of imports of consumption goods, during January-February, imports of automobiles plunged, while imports of durable and semi-durable goods fell modestly and imports of nondurable goods continued to rise.
As an indicator for machinery-equipment investments, the production of investment goods excluding transport somewhat flattened while imports of the same group declined.
Moreover, data regarding construction investments show that the increase in construction investments continued.
With the reduced uncertainty, the small yet discernible recovery in confidence indices and the appreciation of the Turkish lira, a recovery is expected in consumption demand.
With the support of this recovery, domestic demand is expected to start growing steadily by the second quarter.
Yet, second-quarter loan and imports data and BTS indices suggest that this recovery will be a moderate one.
The non-gold export volume index was up month-on-month in January and February and hovered above its fourth-quarter average during January- February.
With the support of the global recovery signaled by recent survey indicators, the pickup in international trade and the Turkish lira depreciation, exports are expected to make a positive contribution to growth in the upcoming period.
PMI and BTS export indicators hint at a similar pattern.
In sum, recent data releases indicate that final domestic demand will lose momentum in the first quarter, whereas exports will limit the impact of this slowdown on growth.
With recent decline in uncertainties, private demand may start recovering as well by the second quarter of the year, which, however, might be curbed by tight financial conditions.
Against this background, the Committee expects the rebalancing to continue and the current account deficit to improve significantly in 2014.
In seasonally adjusted terms, total and non-farm unemployment rates continued to fall in January 2014.
This drop in unemployment rates was mostly driven by the upsurge in non-farm employment.
Employment basically increased across services and construction sectors.
Industrial employment, on the other hand, increased only slightly and remained relatively weak.
After having plummeted during the first months of 2014, confidence indices increased month-on-month in March.
Furthermore, total employment expectations, a BTS indicator, continued to deliver positive returns despite a seasonally-adjusted monthly decline in April.
The Committee assessed the medium-term forecasts to be published in the April Inflation Report.
It was noted that the main reason behind the annual consumer inflation’s overshooting of January forecasts in the first quarter of 2014 was exchange rate movements and the unfavorable course of food prices.
Upon evaluating both the assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and external conditions, the end-2014 inflation forecast is revised upwards in view of exchange rates, import and oil prices, food prices and developments in underlying inflation trend.
The Committee stated that loan growth rates continue to slow down in response to the tight monetary stance and the recent macro prudential measures.
The slowdown in loan growth is mostly attributed to consumer loans and credit cards, while commercial loans expand at a rate similar to past years.
This positive development in loan growth composition is expected to contribute to financial stability, the rebalancing process and the decrease in inflation.
As a matter of fact, data regarding the first quarter of 2014 indicate some deceleration in private final domestic demand.
Given such a demand composition, the Committee expects that aggregate demand conditions will contain inflationary pressures and the current account deficit will exhibit a significant improvement in 2014.
Given the elevated level of inflation, the Committee stated that it is important to prevent the negative effects on the pricing behavior and on the inflation trend.
The strong and front-loaded monetary tightening delivered at the January interim meeting has contained the potential adverse impact of the upside risks on the medium term inflation expectations.
Yet, considering that the positive impact of the monetary tightening will be observed on inflation with some lag, inflation might continue to increase in the short term, partly reflecting the base effects.
In the meantime, the Committee will closely monitor inflation expectations and the pricing behavior and maintain the tight monetary policy stance until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
In times when negative effects on the inflation outlook are strong and uncertainties are large, the Central Bank may tighten the liquidity policy further to restrict these developments.
During additional tightening, the yield curve can be inverted if necessary.
The Committee indicated that the recent decline in uncertainties and the partial improvement in risk premium indicators have reduced the need for an additional tightening in liquidity policy.
With the deceleration in private demand and the significant slowdown in consumer loans, the current tight monetary stance is believed to be enough to attain an inflation outlook consistent with medium term targets.
In case of further deterioration in the trend of inflation or a dramatic rise in uncertainties, the Central Bank might implement additional tightening in liquidity policy.
As the uncertainty about the Fed’s quantitative easing program has recently faded to a great extent and thanks to the global economic recovery, the risk sentiment across global financial markets has become more upbeat.
Yet, expectations about the timing and pace of a Fed rate hike are of importance for pricing in financial markets.
However, because the transmission mechanism of the interest rate channel is better known than quantitative easing and the monetary policy dependence on high-frequency data has decreased in this process, the uncertainty effect of an interest rate hike on financial markets might be more limited than that of the exit from the quantitative easing program.
On the other hand, should there be long-lasting increases in uncertainties and risk premium; the economy may face an additional slowdown through the confidence and balance sheet channels.
If such a risk materializes, the Central Bank will pursue a stabilizing policy by using its policy instruments to reduce the intermediation costs of the banks.
In a scenario where it is necessary to tighten the liquidity policy, macro prudential tools might be used as a stabilizer to contain the repercussions on banking costs.
Similarly, in a scenario where the external funding conditions tighten for banking sector, macro prudential policies might be implemented in a stabilizing way.
The Committee pointed out the possibility of paying interest to the portion of reserve requirements held in Turkish liras in this context.
In February, consumer prices rose by 0.43 percent, and annual inflation increased by 0.14 percentage points to 7.89 percent.
Core inflation indicators displayed an upsurge amid the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Inflation indicators are expected to remain high in the upcoming period due to the unfavorable course of the food prices and the lagged effects of the exchange rate pass-through.
Annual food group inflation fell by 0.83 percentage points to 10.05 percent.
In February, unprocessed food prices decreased due to vegetable prices.
Nevertheless, the unfavorable outlook in unprocessed food prices excluding fresh fruits and vegetables continued, and the annual rate of price increases in this group stood at 24.21 percent.
Processed food prices increased by 1.65 percent on a monthly basis amid the price increases that spread across the group, the largest increases being in the bread-cereals item.
As a consequence, the group’s annual inflation climbed to 9.42 percent.
Meanwhile, the rainfall rate has remained below the seasonal averages in various areas lately, leaving the upside risks to food prices brisk.
Prices of services edged up by 0.77 percent, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 0.38 percentage points to 8.34 percent in February.
These figures indicated that the services inflation has hit the highest level since the first quarter of 2009.
The seasonally adjusted data pointed to a persisting rise in the underlying trend of services inflation in this period as well.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.28 percentage points to 8.39 percent in February.
This was mainly driven by the rising prices of durable goods, particularly automobiles, reflecting the effects of the past depreciation in the Turkish lira.
The seasonally-adjusted data pointed to a higher trend in the core goods inflation compared to January.
Core inflation indicators registered a similar outlook as well.
Against this background, inflation is expected to remain on the rise in the upcoming months, partly reflecting base effects.
Industrial production increased remarkably in January compared to December.
This increase owes to the recovery from December’s weak base as well as to rising export orders and improved export expectations driven by the relative pickup in external demand.
Compared with the fourth-quarter average, January’s production levels are stronger.
Yet, the economic activity is expected to moderate in coming months due to the repercussions of the weak domestic demand on economic activity.
In recent months, global and domestic uncertainties and the resulting increase in risk premiums and exchange rates caused consumer confidence to plunge.
In addition, the tightening in financial conditions has led to a slowdown in consumer loan growth rates.
Available data indicate that sales of appliances and automobiles have been falling recently as well.
Thus, the imports and production of durable consumer goods were significantly down in January compared to the previous month and quarter.
After following a favorable trend in 2013, investment demand has lost some pace due to recent developments.
Expectations for fixed capital investment fell to the lowest level since 2010, while the production of capital goods excluding vehicles, an indicator for the underlying trend of investments, dropped markedly month-on-month in January.
Similarly, sales of commercial vehicles slowed down.
The export volume index was up in January from both December and the fourth-quarter average.
With the support of the global recovery, the robust international import demand, and the Turkish lira depreciation, exports are expected to make a positive contribution to growth in the upcoming period.
In sum, recent data releases indicate that final domestic demand will lose momentum, whereas exports will limit the impact of this slowdown on growth.
Against this background, the Committee expects the rebalancing to continue and the current account deficit to improve substantially in 2014.
In seasonally adjusted terms, total and non-farm unemployment rates were down in December 2013 compared to the previous period.
The Committee assessed that upward risks on the inflation outlook remain important.
Lagged impact of the exchange pass-through continues to exert upside pressures on core inflation, especially through core goods prices.
Services inflation and other indicators regarding pricing behavior also suggest that underlying inflation rate is significantly above the target.
The strong and frontloaded monetary tightening delivered at the January interim meeting has contained the potential adverse impact of the upside risks on the medium term inflation expectations.
Yet, the impact of monetary tightening on inflation will be observed with some lag.
In the meanwhile, inflation is expected to increase until June, partly reflecting the base effects.
Against this backdrop, inflation expectations and pricing behavior will be closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Loan growth continues to slow down in response to the tight monetary policy stance, recent macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows.
The Committee indicated that the slowdown in loan growth can be mostly attributed to consumer loans and credit cards, noting that Turkish lira commercial loans continue to expand at a robust pace.
The pronounced tightening in financial conditions observed in the first quarter suggests that the deceleration trend in loan growth will continue.
The Committee members pointed that it will be useful to closely monitor the supply and demand factors driving loan market in the forthcoming period.
In line with the developments in loan growth, data regarding the first quarter of 2014 indicate some deceleration in private final domestic demand.
Meanwhile, with the help of the recovery in foreign demand, net exports are expected to contribute positively to economic growth.
The Committee expects that such a demand composition will contain upside inflationary pressures and lead to a significant improvement in the current account deficit in 2014.
The Committee stated that despite the moderate expansion in the economic activity, consumption and investment indicators show some relative weakening.
The Committee members indicated that the weakening in demand indicators has not been significantly reflected in the economic activity at this point.
However, as indicated in one of the risk scenarios of the Inflation Report, the risk of a marked slowdown in the economic activity through the confidence and balance sheet channels, caused by the possible persistence of existing uncertainties and elevated risk premiums, should not be overlooked.
It was reminded that the Central Bank has many tools to implement countercyclical policy, should such a risk materialize.
In this respect reserve requirements, reserve option mechanism and liquidity policies may be utilized, if needed.
The Committee has also evaluated the possibility of paying interest to the portion of reserve requirements held in Turkish liras, in the context of the normalization of monetary policy.
It was stated that, such a measure could be considered at a future date if deemed necessary.
Moreover, implications of paying partial interest to reserve requirements were assessed in different dimensions, with regard to its interaction with the reserve option mechanism.
In light of these assessments, it was indicated that any decision regarding the payment of partial interest to reserve requirements to be implemented in the future should be measured and limited.
The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be sustained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
Maintaining the cautious stance in fiscal and financial sector policies is critical to the resilience of our economy against current uncertainties.
Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for maneuvering the monetary policy and improve social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In this respect, implementation of the structural reforms required by the Medium Term Program remains to be of utmost importance.
In January, consumer prices increased by 1.98 percent, and annual inflation reached 7.75 percent.
Food prices, tax adjustments and exchange rate movements were influential in this rise and core inflation indicators recorded an increase due to core goods.
Meanwhile, services inflation maintained its relatively mild course.
Annual food group inflation climbed to 10.89 percent.
In January, not only fresh fruits and vegetables but also other products registered price hikes.
This resulted in increased annual unprocessed food inflation despite the high base from the previous year.
Meanwhile, upon price increases that spread across the group, processed food prices were up by 1.42 percent and the group’s annual inflation reached 8 percent.
In January, despite the fall in international oil prices, energy prices increased owing to the rise in domestic fuel prices amid the depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Meanwhile, in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group, SCT adjustments introduced pushed the tobacco products’ prices up by 7.4 percent.
Prices of services edged up by 0.93 percent, and the group’s annual inflation maintained its level around 8 percent.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a limited rise in the underlying trend of services inflation in this period.
Meanwhile, annual core goods inflation increased by about 1 percentage points to 7.12 percent.
This was mainly driven by the surging prices of durable goods on the reverberations of the depreciation in the Turkish lira besides the raised SCT on automobiles.
On the other hand, annual inflation in the clothing group remained on a downward trend.
Core goods prices accelerated as the depreciation in the Turkish lira that started in mid-December has reflected on prices since January.
Committee (the Committee) closely monitors the recent deterioration in the inflation outlook and expectations.
Inflation is likely to hover above the 5-percent target for some time due to the recent tax adjustments, exchange rate developments and the unfavorable course of food prices.
Recent data suggest that final domestic demand continued to increase moderately in the fourth quarter.
Following the recent sharp fluctuations, the industrial production index remained steady at its November level in December.
Yet, in quarterly terms, industrial production posted a modest quarter-on-quarter increase in the fourth quarter, which is close to the average growth rate seen since early 2012.
The moderate trend in private consumption demand continued in the last quarter of the year.
Production and imports of consumer goods were up quarter-on-quarter compared to the previous quarter.
Despite hovering slightly below the averages of the previous quarter, sales of automobiles and white goods remained elevated throughout the fourth quarter.
Meanwhile, investment demand was more favorable in the fourth quarter.
Production of capital goods grew moderately quarter-on-quarter in the final quarter.
The production of capital goods excluding vehicles, an indicator for the underlying trend, recorded a larger growth than total capital goods.
Similarly, imports of capital goods increased as well.
Data suggest that exports maintained their modest growth trend in the fourth quarter.
In fact, the non-gold export volume index was up in the fourth quarter from the third-quarter average.
The global recovery and the robust international import demand that PMI indicators point to have been effective in this increase.
The increased domestic uncertainty has caused consumer confidence to slump recently.
Meanwhile, automobile sales also slowed dramatically in January.
Moreover, loans, particularly consumer loans, have been posting a gradually slower rate of growth.
On the other hand, despite some weakening, the investment and employment sentiment in January’s Business Tendency Survey (BTS) maintained their moderate levels, while the PMI new order and production indices have no negative outlook.
Against this background, the Committee envisages that private domestic final demand may decelerate in the first quarter of 2014.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates remained unchanged in November 2013.
The rise in employment in this period came largely from the services sector, while construction employment increased after a flat performance throughout 2013 and industrial employment remained relatively weak.
Leading indicators show no signs of additional worsening for employment and point to a moderate employment growth.
In view of the expected slowdown in domestic demand, unemployment appears to be on a slightly upward trend for 2014.
A smaller-than-expected global economic recovery and domestic uncertainties may remain constraint to investment and employment growth for the upcoming period.
The Committee noted that credit growth has been slowing gradually due to tight monetary policy, macroprudential measures and weak capital flows.
Particularly due to macroprudential measures, the growth of consumer loans is expected to slow at a relatively faster pace.
Moreover, it is assessed that the recent uncertainty might cause private demand to weaken in the first quarter.
Data released for the first quarter of 2014 suggest that private domestic final demand might decelerate.
Recent data indicate that exports continue to grow moderately and the non- gold current account balance maintains its improvement trend.
Thus, the Committee stated that the recovering external demand and the slowing private domestic final demand will help to increase the positive contribution from net exports to growth over the year.
This increase may also contain the negative effects of the decelerating domestic final demand on growth.
In addition, the slowdown in consumer loan growth could particularly support the current account rebalancing.
Against this background, the Committee expects the current account balance to display a significant improvement in 2014.
In the second half of 2013, with the high course of food prices and the external uncertainties that led the Turkish lira to depreciate, inflation increased and core inflation indicators and inflation expectations deteriorated.
Recent and lingering external uncertainties coupled with the elevated domestic uncertainties caused additional exchange rate movements, which weighed on the risk of inflation exceeding the target for a protracted period.
Moreover, the recent tax adjustments and the persisting unfavorable course of food prices also exacerbated the deterioration in the inflation outlook.
The Committee closely monitors the recent deterioration in the inflation outlook and expectations.
It is envisaged that factors affecting inflation adversely will keep inflation indicators considerably above the 5-percent target for a while.
Against this background, the Committee underlined that it will not tolerate any deterioration in price stability in the medium-term.
To this end, the Committee opted for a strong and front-loaded monetary tightening in the interim meeting of 28 January 2014 to prevent deterioration in the inflation expectation and the pricing behavior.
The Committee judges that the current policy stance will be enough to anchor inflation expectations.
The Committee indicated that tight monetary policy stance will be sustained until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook and that the liquidity policy may be tightened further if deemed necessary.
Steps taken in this regard will also provide more room for maneuvering the monetary policy and improve social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities permanently at low levels.
Recently, uncertainties in the domestic and foreign markets have increased substantially.
As a consequence, Turkish lira depreciated significantly and risk indicators displayed a marked increase.
Especially, since the last .
Committee (Committee) meeting held on January 21st, heightened risk perceptions towards emerging economies have accelerated the depreciation of some emerging market currencies, leading to a deterioration in their inflation outlook.
Exchange rate movements in Turkey driven by these developments have increased the risk of inflation hovering significantly above the target for an extended period.
Besides rapid exchange rate depreciation, recent tax adjustments and adverse developments in food inflation were other factors contributing to the deterioration in the inflation outlook.
The Central Bank will not tolerate any deterioration in the price stability.
To this end, the Committee assessed that, in order to prevent a deterioration in the inflation expectation and the overall pricing behavior, it would be appropriate to deliver a strong and front-loaded monetary tightening.
The Committee stated that tightening monetary policy under current circumstances will not only contribute to price stability, but also support the macroeconomic stability through a reduction in the exchange rate uncertainty and risk perceptions.
Moreover, it was indicated that increasing the predictability of monetary policy would be helpful amid weakening capital inflows.
Accordingly, in order to preserve price stability, the Committee decided to implement a strong monetary tightening and to simplify the operational framework.
In this respect, (i) one-week repo rate is increased from 4.5 percent to 10 percent; (ii) the Central Bank liquidity will be provided primarily from one-week repo rate instead of the marginal funding rate in the forthcoming period.
The Committee judges that, current policy stance will be enough to anchor inflation expectations.
Under this stance, inflation is expected to reach the 5 percent target by mid-2015.
Although January inflation may exceed the market expectations, tight policy stance should prevent any deterioration in medium term inflation expectations.
In subsequent months, underlying inflation is expected to trend downside.
The Committee indicated that tight monetary policy stance will be sustained until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
If deemed necessary, liquidity policy may be tightened further in order to invert the slope of the yield curve.
In December, consumer prices increased by 0.46 percent, while annual inflation rose to 7.40 percent.
Energy prices were influential in this development and there was no significant change in the contribution of other main groups to the rise in annual inflation.
In this period, core inflation indicators continued to follow a downward course as in November.
Annual food group inflation receded to 9.67 percent.
In December, annual unprocessed food group inflation remained flat at 12.88 percent, while items other than fresh fruits and vegetables saw widespread price hikes.
Processed food prices increased by 0.73 percent due to the bread and cereals group, while the group’s annual inflation declined to 7.11 percent.
Leading indicators for January suggest that annual food group inflation will remain elevated because of the impact of adverse weather conditions on fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
In December, energy prices rose by 2.35 percent mainly owing to sharp increases in LPG and bottled gas prices.
Moreover, the recent depreciation of the Turkish lira caused gas and diesel prices to rise.
As a result, annual energy inflation recorded the lowest year-end level of the last four years despite rising to 5.15 percent.
In December, services prices increased by 0.39 percent, and the group’s annual inflation came in at 7.98 percent.
Committee (the Committee) judged that, despite the favorable course of energy inflation throughout the year, wage increases and the recovery in domestic demand were influential in the rise of services inflation.
However, it is noted that recent seasonally adjusted data indicate a slowdown in the underlying trend of services inflation.
Meanwhile, annual core goods inflation fell to 6.20 percent in December due to the downward contribution of clothing prices and the waning effects of the Turkish lira depreciation.
Seasonally adjusted data also showed that the underlying trend of the group’s inflation was on a downward path.
However, the resumed depreciation of the Turkish lira as of mid-December and January’s tax adjustments for automobiles may deteriorate the outlook for core goods inflation.
In fact, leading indicators have recently pointed to a significant increase in prices of durable goods, especially automobiles.
In sum, given that core inflation indicators may show a marked increase in January, it is noted that inflation will remain significantly above the 5 percent target in the short term due to unfavorable food prices as well.
Recent data releases suggest that final domestic demand continued to grow moderately in the fourth quarter.
The industrial production index compensated the October fall with a rise in November.
Although recently there have been sharp volatilities in seasonally adjusted industrial production due to religious holidays, on the whole, the industrial production index posted a modest increase.
It should be noted that this trend is almost equal to the average growth rate seen since early 2012.
Production of consumer goods was down while imports of consumer goods were up during October-November compared to the previous quarter.
Automobile sales were higher throughout the fourth quarter than the average of the previous quarter.
Total sales of automobiles and light commercial vehicles suggest that vehicle sales were virtually flat over the fourth quarter.
While down from the previous quarter, sales of appliances remained elevated in the fourth quarter.
Indicators for investment demand followed a relatively favorable path in the final quarter.
Production of capital goods went slightly up during October- November compared to the previous quarter.
Production of capital goods excluding vehicles, an indicator for the underlying trend, posted a larger increase than total capital goods.
Similarly, there were increases in imports of capital goods as well.
The expectation for fixed capital investment spending asked in the Business Tendency Survey continued to rise for the fourth consecutive month and surpassed the third-quarter level in the fourth quarter.
Survey indicators for the final quarter suggest that economic activity continues to recover.
In fact, both the Business Tendency Survey’s past-three-month production question and the PMI index exceeded their third-quarter averages.
The BTS’ three-month-ahead order expectations increased significantly for both domestic and export markets.
In fact, the non-gold export volume index was up in October-November from the third- quarter average.
PMI indicators point to a global recovery, while world import demand is surging.
The recovery of the euro area, Turkey’s leading trading partner accounting for a substantial portion of Turkish exports, and the improving global growth outlook indicate that net exports may make a positive contribution to growth in the upcoming period.
The Committee stated that the recent hike in risk premiums and exchange rates might put pressure on private demand in the first quarter of 2014.
In fact, the preliminary CNBC-e consumer confidence index for the first fifteen days of January shows deterioration in consumer sentiment about current economic conditions and future expectations.
However, it is noted that the expected recovery of external demand will restrict the slowdown in total demand.
Accordingly, the composition of growth is expected to support the decline in both inflation and current account balance in the upcoming period.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates fell in October 2013 thanks to growing non-farm employment.
Although the uptrend in unemployment halted, the rise in non-farm employment is restricted to certain sectors.
Employment remains weak in the industrial sector, while the increase in non-farm employment came mostly from construction and services sectors.
Leading indicators for labor markets show signs of a moderately growing employment for November and December.
Yet, global economic uncertainties and domestic political developments may remain a constraint to investment and employment growth for the upcoming period .
The meeting involved an assessment of the January Inflation Report forecasts.
According to the Committee, recent data suggest that final domestic demand and exports continued to grow at a moderate pace during the fourth quarter.
It was stated that the cautious monetary policy stance, the announced macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows lead to a gradual slowdown in loan growth.
Combined with the impact of recent domestic uncertainties, private demand is expected to slow down in the first quarter.
Meanwhile, the expected recovery in the economic activity in Europe should have a positive impact on the external demand.
Accordingly, the decline in the current account deficit excluding gold trade is expected to be more significant in 2014.
The Committee closely monitors the impact of the recent increase in the risk premium on the inflation outlook and expectations.
Inflation is likely to hover above the 5 percent target for some time due to recent tax adjustments and lagged effects of exchange rate developments.
Moreover, the volatility in unprocessed food prices adds to the uncertainty regarding inflation forecasts.
The Committee stated that the liquidity stance should be tightened to align inflation outlook with the medium term targets.
It was indicated that, given the recently heightened uncertainties, designing a flexible mechanism would be more appropriate.
To this end, it was stated that interbank money market interest rates will materialize at 9 percent during additional monetary tightening days, instead of 7.75 percent.
In this respect, Central Bank lending rate (the marginal funding rate) will be announced and implemented at 9 percent, instead of 7.75 percent during the additional tightening days.
Moreover, the Committee indicated that the upper limit of the amount of funding provided at stable funding rate-1 may be removed due to the increased funding need of the financial system in the recent period.
The slowdown in domestic demand is expected to contain the effect of the cost-push shocks on inflation to some extent in the coming period.
However, lagged effects of the exchange rate movements and the unfavorable course of food prices are likely to cause inflation to remain above the target for an extended period, which may result in higher rigidity in expectations and stronger inflation inertia.
Materialization of such a scenario and deterioration of pricing behavior may prompt the Committee to implement the necessary tightening in the monetary policy stance.
On the other hand, should these uncertainties and the increase in the risk premium last for a long time, the economy may face a pronounced slowdown through the confidence and balance-sheet channels.
Should such a risk materialize, the Central Bank will pursue a stabilizing policy by using its policy instruments to reduce the intermediation costs of the banks.
Inflation forecasts presented in the baseline scenario take the framework outlined in the Medium Term Program as given.
Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices in the forthcoming period.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal stance deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently, has an adverse effect on the medium- term inflation outlook.
In December, consumer prices edged down by 0.44 percent and annual inflation fell approximately by 1 point to 8.17 percent at the year-end.
This fall was mainly driven by energy and food prices, yet inflation lost pace in almost all sub-groups.
The decline in energy prices continued at a stronger pace in line with the international oil prices.
The decline in the underlying trend in inflation got more apparent in services, but remained relatively limited in core goods.
Annual food inflation decreased by 1.64 points to 12.73 percent and stood close to the assumptions made in the October Inflation Report.
The seasonally-adjusted data pointed to a partial correction in unprocessed food prices in the last four months, which was led particularly by fruits and vegetables.
Similarly, despite the deceleration in the monthly inflation trend in processed food prices in December after a long while, the group’s annual inflation remained high with 13.16 percent.
Indicators for January signal for a possible decline in the annual food inflation due to the unprocessed food group.
Energy prices remained on the decline and fell by 1.86 percent in December.
The group’s annual inflation plummeted by 4.22 points to -1.54 percent, hitting the lowest level of the index history.
The first-round effects of the decline in oil prices on energy prices appeared in fuel and bottled gas prices.
Brent crude oil prices decreased approximately by USD 45 in the July-December period, and the direct effect of this decline on the consumer inflation through fuel and bottled gas prices was around -0.76 points in this period.
This fall in these two items continued in January.
Annual core goods inflation receded approximately by 0.5 points to 8.89 percent.
This was led by prices of durables and the high-rated decline in clothing prices.
Prices of durable goods edged down by 0.30 percent in December, and the downtrend in the group’s annual inflation continued.
The sustained mild course of the prices of durable goods accompanied by the gradual elimination of the cumulative exchange rate effects suggests a notable decline in core goods inflation in the first quarter.
Prices of services crept up by 0.18 percent and the group’s annual inflation receded by 0.22 points to 8.59 percent in the last month of the year.
The rate of increase in the seasonally-adjusted prices of services saw a remarkable improvement in the last two months.
Positive effects of the decline in fuel prices on the related groups of services continued with a slower pace in December.
In addition, the inflation trend in other services followed a weaker course in the last two months.
The notable fall in oil prices is expected to have further positive effects on the prices of services that are closely related to fuel prices.
The underlying trend in services inflation displays an evident decline, while the improvement in the trend of core goods inflation remained more limited.
Data announced for the final quarter of 2014 point to a moderate recovery for economic activity.
Having decreased by a mere 0.1 percent month-on-month in November, industrial production fell by 0.9 percent from the third quarter during October-November.
This development stems largely from the weak external demand as well as the volatility caused by shifting holidays and transportation production.
On the other hand, the recovery observed in other leading indicators suggests that the information content of the industrial production regarding the underlying trend of the fourth quarter economic activity might be limited.
In fact, there have been widespread increases across nonfarm employment recently.
Moreover, the import volume index for non-gold intermediate goods grew strongly during October- November, while non-gold exports increased only modestly.
Survey indicators also point to a more benign outlook for the fourth quarter compared to the third quarter.
The Business Tendency Survey (BTS) and PMI indicators for manufacturing have shown a more robust growth in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter, while the BTS’ three-month-ahead expectation for production and question of three- month-ahead total orders continued to improve in the fourth quarter.
In this regard, the underlying trend of economic activity is considered to have recovered moderately.
Data on the expenditure side point to some increase in private domestic demand for the fourth quarter.
During October-November, the production of consumer goods was higher than the previous quarter’s average, whereas their imports were lower.
An indicator for investments, the production of machinery-equipment remained unchanged quarter-on-quarter, while its imports increased.
Domestic sales of automobiles and light commercial vehicles grew robustly in the second half of 2014.
Mineral production and construction employment, a proxy for construction investments, have registered moderate increases.
Loans, on the other hand, remain on a modest upward track.
Against this background, domestic demand is expected to recover further in the fourth quarter.
The improved investment trend contains positive signals for investments over the upcoming period, but the weak consumer confidence poses a downside risk.
External demand indicators point to no improvement for the fourth quarter of 2014 in the rebalancing process based on goods excluding gold, which ground to a halt in the third quarter.
Thus, during October-November, exports excluding gold increased only slightly from the previous quarter, whereas imports excluding gold picked up at a relatively faster pace.
However, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans will support the improvement in the current account balance.
Having weakened after the first quarter of 2014, nonfarm employment posted notable gains during August-October period.
Yet, this nonfarm employment growth has been balanced off by the growing nonfarm labor force participation recently, causing unemployment to remain steady.
Employment growth was evident across all nonfarm sectors.
Specifically, industrial and construction sectors are still experiencing growth in employment, which started in August.
The services sector also has contributed further to nonfarm employment growth.
As of October, actual data and leading indicators signal some recovery in employment for the fourth quarter, but considering the increase in labor force participation, unemployment rates are not expected to decrease.
Loan growth is at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures.
The composition of loans also continues to evolve in the desired direction.
This loan composition not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
Committee (the Committee) expects the growth composition to change in favor of domestic demand in the upcoming period.
Ongoing weakness in growth across European countries, the largest export market of Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limits the growth of exports.
Yet, with improved financial conditions and income effect of falling oil prices, domestic demand may see some recovery.
In sum, external demand remains weak whereas domestic demand contributes moderately to growth.
This change in the growth composition might lead to a widening in the non-energy current account deficit to some extent but the overall current account deficit is expected to narrow further down thanks to the improvement in the energy trade balance.
Downside risks regarding economic activity continue to be important for the upcoming period.
The lingering volatility across global financial markets and the sluggish course of confidence indices may cause private final demand to provide limited support to growth.
In the case of an additional slowdown in external demand and a sizeable decline in global growth rates, the decrease in commodity prices will pull inflation down but at the same time lead to notable adverse effects on economic activity.
Under such circumstances, the Committee will employ the policy tools to support the economic activity.
There are many factors that might have a favorable effect on the inflation outlook for 2015.
The recovery of economic activity is likely to be a gradual one and aggregate demand developments are expected to support disinflation.
The tight monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures continue to have a favorable impact on inflation, especially on inflation excluding energy and food (core inflation) indicators.
The adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate developments on annual inflation is also tapering off.
Moreover, falling commodity prices, in particular oil prices, contribute to disinflation.
In fact, there has been a notable decline in medium- term inflation expectations recently.
In light of these positive developments, the Committee has decided on a measured cut in the one week repo rate.
The Committee stated that, against heightened global volatility, it would be helpful to pursue a flexible monetary policy in the short term and assessed that it would be appropriate to keep the overnight rates unchanged at this stage.
The Committee stated that using a flexible interest rate corridor would cushion the economy against the volatility in global markets.
In this regard, inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be further closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
The meeting also included a discussion of the projections to be published in the Inflation Report.
Under the current monetary policy stance, the Committee anticipates that inflation will decline to levels close to the target by mid-2015.
Yet, a more persistent reduction in inflation necessitates a cautious approach in monetary policy.
The Committee sees that a major opportunity has emerged to bring inflation down permanently in an environment where cost and demand factors are supportive of disinflation.
Keeping inflation permanently at low levels might contribute to investments and potential growth.
In this context, the Bank will continue to act decisively to bring down inflation and make future monetary policy decisions conditional on the pace of improvement in the inflation outlook.
The Committee welcomed the development that the Medium Term Program incorporates disinflation as one of the main objectives.
Moreover, it was indicated that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute to the potential growth significantly.
In January, consumer prices increased by 1.10 percent and annual inflation fell by 0.93 point to 7.24 percent.
This fall was mainly driven by energy and food prices, and inflation lost pace in almost all sub-groups except services.
The decline in energy prices continued in line with falling international oil prices.
The improvement in the underlying trend of core indicators was sustained due to core goods.
Annual food inflation decreased by 1.76 points to 10.97 percent.
Although the seasonally-adjusted unprocessed food prices increased in January following the decline in the last four months, the group’s inflation fell to 9.39 percent.
Processed food prices recorded a monthly upsurge, yet the group’s annual inflation receded to 12.56 percent also due to the high base.
Being also affected by adverse weather conditions, the indicators for February signal a possible uptick in the annual food inflation due to the unprocessed food group.
Energy prices remained on the decline and fell by 0.78 percent in January.
The group’s annual inflation dropped by 1.50 points to -3.04 percent, hitting the lowest level of the index history.
The effects of the decline in oil prices on energy prices appeared in fuel and bottled gas prices, while the upsurge in municipal water tariffs was remarkable.
Meanwhile, the increase in fuel prices after six months in February due to the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the rise in oil prices indicates that the contribution of energy group to the decline in annual consumer inflation will be restricted to some extent.
Annual core goods inflation edged down approximately by 0.3 points to 8.57 percent.
This was led by prices of goods excluding clothing, particularly durable consumption goods.
Although the group’s annual inflation decreased mostly owing to the base effect, prices surged across durables.
In groups excluding durables and clothing, annual inflation decreased while there were increases in the monthly inflation.
Recent exchange rate developments may restrict the fall in core goods inflation, yet a notable decline in core goods is expected in the first quarter.
Prices of services increased by 1.06 percent and the group’s annual inflation crept up by 0.14 points to 8.73 percent mainly due to communication and other services groups.
Moreover, maintenance-repair and healthcare services also saw an increase in inflation in this period.
Additionally, the annual inflation in the restaurants-hotels group maintained its high course owing to the negative developments in food prices.
Accordingly, the seasonally-adjusted data exhibit an increase in the underlying trend of services inflation.
In sum, January was marked by a sustained improvement in the underlying trend of core inflation indicators and favorable figures in energy inflation amid the lingering fall in international oil prices.
Core inflation is projected to decline further in the upcoming period in line with the maintained reasonable levels in inflation trends.
Data announced for the final quarter of 2014 point to a limited recovery for economic activity.
Industrial production increased 1.2 percent in December, but fell by 0.5 percent quarter-on-quarter due to the volatility in other transport vehicles and the Feast of the Sacrifice.
The dampening effects of the weak external demand have become more evident, while domestic demand has yet to accelerate adequately, which keeps economic activity from a robust recovery.
According to data on the expenditure side, in the final quarter of 2014, the production of consumer goods was higher than the previous quarter’s average, while the decline in imports of consumer goods was limited.
Domestic sales of automobiles and home appliances grew robustly.
Loans, on the other hand, remained on a modest upward track.
The weak consumer confidence was a limiting factor on consumer spending in this quarter.
While the production of machinery-equipment, an indicator for investments, fell slightly, its imports increased significantly.
Mineral production and construction employment, variables related to construction investments, have registered some recovery.
The investment trend that improved from the first half of 2014 contains positive signals for investments.
Against this background, private domestic demand is believed to have increased moderately in the fourth quarter.
External demand indicators suggest that net exports did not contribute to growth in the fourth quarter of 2014.
The slowing growth rates across Turkey’s major trading partners and geopolitical tensions dampened export growth, while the modest recovery in domestic demand led to an increase in import demand.
Thus, there has been no improvement for the fourth quarter of 2014 in the rebalancing process based on goods excluding gold.
However, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Data available for the first quarter of 2015 indicate that the fourth-quarter outlook will persist.
January’s PMI and February’s Business Tendency Survey (BTS) indicators point to no acceleration in production.
The increased volatility in financial markets and the weak consumer confidence restrain domestic demand.
Moreover, external trade data for January show that exports remain weak due to external demand.
According to seasonally adjusted data, unemployment picked up in November 2014 due to sluggish nonfarm employment.
Construction employment has been recovering since August, yet the recent growth in industrial employment has been balanced off by a decline.
The services sector has continued to contribute to nonfarm employment.
PMI and BTS survey indicators that reflect actual and expected employment figures for firms remain elevated as of January 2015 and signal no additional worsening for industrial employment.
However, the limited increase in industrial production suggests that risks are on the downside for industrial employment.
As of January 2015, indicators for the labor market point to an weak employment growth and a stagnant unemployment rate.
The annual growth rate of commercial loans is quite strong relative to that of consumer loans.
The weak external demand caused by the sluggish growth across European countries, the largest export market for Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limits the growth of exports.
Yet, domestic demand may see some gradual recovery, also with the income effect of lower oil prices.
In sum, external demand remains weak while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately.
Thus, the growth composition may change in favor of domestic demand in the upcoming period.
This change in the growth composition might lead to a widening in the non- energy current account deficit to some extent but the overall current account deficit is expected to narrow further down thanks to the improvement in the energy trade balance.
In the case of an additional slowdown in external demand and a sizeable decline in global growth rates, the decrease in commodity prices will pull inflation down but at the same time lead to notable adverse effects on domestic economic activity.
Under such circumstances, the Committee will employ the policy tools to support the economy.
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies are having a favorable impact on inflation, especially on inflation excluding energy and food (core inflation indicators).
In this regard, the Committee anticipates that core inflation will continue to decline.
Moreover, lower level of commodity prices, particularly oil, continue to support disinflation.
However, the recent volatility in oil prices and exchange rates might limit the support provided by energy group to disinflation.
Meanwhile, food prices may see some volatility, especially in unprocessed food, due to weather conditions.
Having the foreseen decline in inflation to be more persistent is important for maintaining the progress made in inflation over the last decade.
A persistent decrease in inflation will contribute to the fall in long-term real interest rates by leading to declines in risk and inflation premia.
These developments will have a favorable impact on public balance and potential growth.
In this context, a more persistent reduction in inflation necessitates a cautious approach in monetary policy.
Taking into account the heightened volatility in food and energy prices, the Committee cut the interest rates but with a cautious approach kept the rate cuts at a measured scale.
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the improvements in the inflation outlook.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Global financial markets continue to follow a volatile course.
The ongoing uncertainty about global monetary policies cause the global risk appetite and capital flows to be data-sensitive.
The Federal Reserve’s (Fed) policy normalization process and the European Central Bank’s new quantitative easing program have been major factors affecting financial markets.
Yet, higher risk of deflation in developed countries increases the probability of postponement in the normalization of monetary policies.
The Committee pointed out that, in an environment of continued uncertainty over global financial markets and economic activity, prudential borrowing is crucial to limit the accumulation of macro- financial risks.
Moreover, it was indicated that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth.
In February, consumer prices increased by 0.71 percent and annual inflation rose by 0.31 points to 7.55 percent.
This increase was mainly driven by food prices.
The decline in the annual inflation of non-food consumer prices has continued.
Underlying inflation rose in services but fell in core goods.
Overall, core inflation indicators continued to improve.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages surged by 2.73 points to 13.70 percent amid developments in unprocessed food prices.
This period was marked by escalating vegetable prices caused by adverse weather conditions and supply-related upsurges in meat prices.
On the other hand, despite the receding annual inflation in processed food prices, the monthly trend of increase remained elevated in this subcategory.
Indicators for March signal that the annual food inflation will remain high.
Annual energy inflation remained modest with a growth rate of -1.92 percent despite rising fuel prices and water tariffs.
Yet, energy prices are expected to have a less constraining effect on annual consumer inflation due to soaring prices of fuel and bottled gas amid the Turkish lira depreciation in March.
Prices of services were up by 0.68 percent in February while annual services inflation fell by 0.10 points to 8.63 percent.
In this period, changes in food and oil prices as well as exchange rates exerted cost pressures on prices of services.
Accordingly, the monthly rate of increase in catering prices accelerated due to rising food prices.
Moreover, having declined since November, prices of transport services picked up slightly amid higher fuel prices while prices of some items sensitive to exchange rates surged notably.
As a result, services inflation remained elevated throughout February.
Annual core goods inflation decreased by 1.78 points to 6.79 percent in February.
Annual inflation was down across all main categories, particularly in durable goods.
The decline in annual core goods inflation was largely driven by base effects.
Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in prices of core goods excluding clothing reflected the pass-through of the Turkish lira depreciation, although the recent weakening of domestic demand conditions has partially balanced off the exchange rate-driven cost pressures.
Accordingly, the underlying trend of core goods inflation fell to a modest level in February.
To sum up, (core) inflation indicators excluding energy and food continued to decline in February.
Yet, the current course of food prices and the exchange rate developments are the key risk factors regarding the inflation outlook.
Industrial production recorded a monthly decline of 1.4 percent in January.
This was largely attributed to the slowdown in domestic demand growth and the weakening external demand as well as to the setbacks in the supply chain and construction activities caused by January’s adverse weather conditions.
February’s PMI and Business Tendency Survey (BTS) data suggest that the weak course of industrial production has continued lately.
Data on the expenditure side suggest that demand conditions do not yet reveal a significant recovery.
In January, the production of consumer goods was lower than the previous quarter’s average, while the imports of consumer goods were on the rise.
In this period, domestic sales of home appliances dropped.
Similarly, sales of automobiles were down from the fourth-quarter average during the January- February period.
Consumer confidence continued to weaken amid uncertainty over global markets.
Among indicators for investments, the production and imports of machinery-equipment fell in January from the previous quarter’s average.
The BTS investment tendency indicator, which recorded a recovery over the second half of 2014, has not gained a steady footing as of the first quarter of 2015.
Among variables related to construction investments, the production of minerals declined whereas the imports of minerals increased.
After an upsurge starting in the second half of 2014, construction employment flattened in December.
In sum, recent indicators suggest that private domestic demand has contributed moderately to growth albeit at a slower pace in the first quarter of 2015.
According to the real measures of external trade indicators, the rebalancing process has not shown a notable improvement in January.
During this period, non-gold exports were weaker than their fourth-quarter average, while non-gold imports were flat.
The slowdown in exports was mostly due to the weak growth across Turkey’s major trading partners.
However, the developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Thus, the current account balance is expected to improve further throughout 2015.
In December 2014, both total and nonfarm unemployment decreased.
Although there was no robust employment growth in this period, the flat labor participation rate helped to bring unemployment rates down.
Across nonfarm sectors, services employment increased whereas industrial employment recorded a slight fall.
The PMI and BTS survey indicators that reflect actual and expected employment figures for firms were down in February 2015.
Other indicators for the labor market point to no significant recovery in employment as of the first quarter of 2015. .
Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost some momentum in the first quarter of the year.
This slowdown was attributed to the weak external demand, the volatile financial markets and adverse weather conditions.
As it is too early at this point to distinguish the negative impact of weather conditions, the Committee suggested monitoring the data closely for a while before making a more definitive assessment regarding the underlying trend of economic activity.
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies are having a favorable impact on inflation, especially inflation excluding energy and food (core inflation indicators).
The moderate course of aggregate demand conditions and the continued downtrend in import prices support disinflation as of the first quarter.
In the short run, the annual rate of increase in core indicators is likely to decline further thanks to base effects.
However, elevated food prices and the recent exchange rate movements will cause inflation to hover above the level indicated in the January Inflation Report for some time.
Global markets continue to follow a volatile course.
The reduced predictability regarding global economy, the low inflation rates across advanced economies, and the growing uncertainty along with the decoupling of monetary policies cause global markets to remain highly data-sensitive.
As a result, the risk appetite and capital flows continue to be volatile.
The Committee pointed out that the measures the CBRT has recently taken in terms of foreign exchange liquidity and prudent borrowing are to minimize macro financial risks arising from the uncertainty in global financial markets and global economic activity.
In sum, the uncertainty in global markets and elevated food prices necessitates maintaining the cautious stance in monetary policy.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.
The Committee assessed that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth over the medium to long term.
Any measure that would strengthen stability and confidence, ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline, and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates at low levels.
In March, consumer prices increased by 1.19 percent and annual inflation rose by 0.06 points to 7.61 percent.
Inflation in food and related services maintained its high course, while the decline in the annual consumer inflation excluding food and catering services continued.
Underlying trends of core inflation indicators registered some increase in this period.
Annual inflation in food and non‐alcoholic beverages rose by 0.42 points to 14.12 percent.
This was led by unprocessed food prices, and ongoing price hikes particularly in vegetables‐fruits and meat stood out.
On the other hand, annual inflation receded in processed food prices.
Unfavorable influence of food prices to inflation continued with an increasing trend in this period and contribution of food group reached 3.47 points in annual inflation.
On the other hand, energy prices rose by 1.60 percent in March, yet the group’s annual inflation remained low with 0.19 percent.
Prices of services were up by 0.56 percent in March, while annual services inflation fell by 0.1 points to 8.53 percent.
Annual inflation slowed in groups other than rents and restaurants‐hotels.
Due to the increased cost pressures driven by food prices, the divergence between the annual inflation rates of catering prices and other services groups continued.
The rise in the underlying trend of services inflation in February continued in this period.
Annual inflation of core goods decreased by 1.25 points to 5.54 percent in March.
Annual inflation was down across all main categories, particularly in durable goods, largely due to the base effect.
In the first quarter, pass‐through of the exchange rate developments to core goods inflation under attenuated demand conditions proved limited.
Meanwhile, the underlying trend of core goods inflation exhibited some deterioration.
To sum up, the ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies continue to have a favorable impact on inflation, especially inflation excluding energy and food (core inflation indicators).
Despite the slowdown in domestic demand, the high course of food prices and the exchange rate developments are the key risk factors regarding the inflation outlook in the upcoming period.
According to data released by TURKSTAT, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 2.6 percent year‐on‐year in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Thus, annual growth ended 2014 at 2.9 percent.
On the production side, the value‐added from all sectors except construction posted year‐on‐year increases in the final quarter.
Yet, over 2014, the agricultural value‐added contributed negatively to annual growth due to drought‐ driven production losses, whereas value‐added of construction, industry and services sectors expanded.
On the spending front, the private demand for consumption and machinery‐equipment investment added to growth in the fourth quarter, while the public sector made a weaker contribution.
Net exports made a negative contribution to growth in this period as imports increased at a faster pace than exports.
Over 2014, Europe’s sluggish growth and geopolitical tensions across neighboring countries dampened exports.
However, imports nearly flattened on the back of the slowing rate of increase in domestic demand, making net exports the demand component that provided the highest contribution to growth in 2014.
Data released for the first quarter of 2015 point to a relatively weak outlook for economic activity.
Although industrial production recorded a monthly increase of 1.7 percent in February, the level of production remained unchanged from the fourth quarter of 2014 during January‐February period.
This outlook is mostly attributed to the slowdown in domestic demand growth and the weak external demand as well as to the setbacks in the supply chain and construction activities caused by adverse weather conditions in January and February.
PMI and Business Tendency Survey (BTS) data suggest that this weak course will continue in March.
Data on the expenditure side show that the production of consumer goods was lower than the previous quarter’s average, while the imports of consumer goods were on the rise.
Yet, sales of automobiles were up in the first quarter.
Among indicators for investments, the production and imports of machinery‐equipment went down from the previous quarter’s average.
Among variables related to construction investments, the production and imports of minerals declined.
The investment tendency failed to demonstrate a steady recovery in the first quarter of 2015, thus remaining weak.
Against this background, private domestic demand is expected to slow down slightly and contribute moderately to growth in the first quarter of 2015.
External demand indicators show that the rebalancing process based on goods excluding gold, which came to a halt in the second half of 2014, has not shown an improvement as of January‐February.
This outlook is largely driven by the weak growth across Turkey’s trading partners and the slowing yet ongoing domestic demand growth.
In fact, during this period non‐gold exports were down, while non‐ gold imports increased from their averages in the previous quarter.
Nevertheless, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans continue to contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
In January 2015, both total and nonfarm unemployment rates decreased on the back of rising nonfarm employment.
Across nonfarm sectors, services employment continued to grow whereas construction employment maintained the negative pattern that started in December.
On the other hand, after falling in previous months, industrial employment regained momentum, providing a major contribution to the fall in unemployment.
To summarize, first‐quarter data have yet to signal a recovery in economic activity.
In this period, external demand weakened, but domestic demand is expected to contribute moderately to growth.
However, the uncertainty over global markets and the weak course of consumer and investor confidence increase the downside risks to growth for the upcoming period.
Thus, demand conditions are expected to support disinflation.
Commercial loans grow at a faster pace than consumer loans.
This loan outlook not only limits medium‐term inflationary pressures but also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
The weak external demand caused by the sluggish growth across European countries, the largest export market for Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring countries continues to limit the growth of exports.
In addition to the weak external demand, the recent plunge in the value of the euro against the US dollar may have an adverse impact on firms that export in euro, but Turkey’s share in the European market remains robust.
The recent signs of recovery for the European economy might be a development that would boost the external demand.
Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost some momentum in the first quarter.
This slowdown was largely due to the weak external demand, volatility in financial markets and adverse weather conditions.
Although economic activity is expected to grow gradually and moderately from the second quarter onwards, downside risks remain important.
Lingering volatility in global financial markets and the weak course of confidence indices are the risk factors that may limit the contribution of the private sector final demand to growth.
In case of an additional slowdown in external demand and a sizeable decline in global growth rates, the decrease in commodity prices will pull inflation down but at the same time lead to notable adverse effects on domestic economic activity.
The Committee evaluated the medium‐term forecasts to be published in the April Inflation Report.
The first quarter’s higher‐than‐projected annual consumer inflation compared to the January Inflation Report is mostly attributed to soaring food prices.
Moreover, oil prices and TL‐denominated import prices put cost pressures on inflation.
Analyzing the assumptions and external conditions that underlie the inflation forecasts, the end‐2015 inflation forecast is revised upwards in view of oil prices, TL‐denominated import prices and output gap developments.
Low levels of international commodity prices and the moderate course of aggregate demand conditions support disinflation.
The Committee expects the annual inflation of core indicators to decline further in the short run, with also contribution of base effects.
However, the recent exchange rate movements may have an adverse impact on the core inflation outlook.
Food prices remain as the main risk factor for the inflation forecast.
Although food inflation is expected to remain high in the short term according to the baseline scenario, food prices are likely to see a notable correction upon the introduction of new‐season products in the summer months.
Moreover, measures that may be proposed by the Food Committee are assessed to contribute to the decline in the food inflation in the upcoming period.
However, prices of some food items are sensitive to the exchange rate and there are uncertainties over supply‐side developments, which necessitate caution against food inflation.
Reduced predictability of global economy and increased uncertainties amid the divergence among the monetary policies of advanced economies cause global markets to remain highly data‐sensitive.
Against this background, the volatility in the risk appetite and capital flows continues.
The Committee emphasized that measures recently taken in the FX liquidity, intermediation costs and prudential borrowing aimed at reducing macrofinancial risks stemming from uncertainties regarding global financial markets and the course of economic activity.
Macro financial risks will be closely monitored in the upcoming period and additional measures will be taken when deemed necessary.
In sum, the uncertainty in global markets and elevated food prices necessitate maintaining the cautious stance in monetary policy.
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the pace of improvements in the inflation outlook.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently, have an adverse effect on the medium‐term inflation outlook.
The Committee assessed that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth.
Any measure that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long‐term government securities at low levels.
In April, consumer prices increased by 1.63 percent and annual inflation rose by 0.30 points to 7.91 percent.
This rise in annual inflation stemmed from the energy group, and particularly fuel prices.
Inflation in food and related services maintained the high course, while the annual consumer inflation excluding food and catering services posted a slight increase, yet remained low.
Annual core inflation indicators edged down again, whereas underlying trends thereof registered some increase in this period.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.24 points to 14.36 percent in April.
This was mainly led by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which hit 18.88 percent.
Among the unprocessed items, fresh vegetables-fruits and meat stood out with an ongoing adverse outlook.
On the other hand, annual inflation receded in processed food prices while monthly price increases were high in sub-items excluding bread.
The contribution of food prices to annual inflation continued to rise and reached 3.51 points in April.
Energy prices rose by 0.43 percent in April amid rising fuel and water prices, and the group’s annual inflation reached 1.62 percent mainly due to the base effect.
Prices of services rose by 0.74 percent in April, and the annual services inflation edged up by 0.2 points to 8.74 percent.
Cost pressures driven by food prices continued, while the effects of the recent volatility in exchange rates have been observed in the sensitive groups.
The underlying trend of services has remained flat compared to the last month and stayed high.
Annual inflation of core goods decreased by 0.48 points to 5.06 percent in April.
Annual inflation was down across all main categories, particularly clothing.
Lagged effects of exchange rate developments proved apparent in monthly price developments.
Accordingly, the underlying trend of core goods inflation recorded some increase.
To sum up, the ongoing cautious monetary policy stance along with domestic demand conditions continue to have a favorable impact on core inflation, whereas the recently-elevated volatility in exchange rates has limited the improvement in core inflation.
Moreover, volatility in energy and food prices affects the consumer inflation adversely.
In March, seasonally and calendar-day adjusted industrial production grew by 2.2 percent month-on-month, recording a robust increase for the second month in a row.
Thus, industrial production grew by 1.2 percent quarter-on-quarter and 1.3 percent year-on-year in the first quarter.
Production developments have varied across industries.
The weak external demand affected the textiles industry negatively while weather conditions dampened the other minerals industry, which is sensitive to construction activity.
These developments drove the industrial production down by 0.4 points in the first quarter.
However, the industries of vehicles, other transport vehicles, pharmaceuticals, and oil products added a total of 1.6 points to the quarterly growth.
Although industrial production increases solidly, survey indicators present a weaker outlook.
The PMI production data have been hovering below 50 since the beginning of the year.
The equilibrium value of the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) question about production over the last three months has been declining gradually since October 2014.
Survey indicators for domestic and external demand confirm the weak course of exports and do not produce strong signals about domestic demand.
Thus, PMI data on new orders and new export orders have remained below 50 since January.
Orders over the last three months and three-month-ahead order expectations from BTS have been weakening in both exports and the domestic market.
In sum, while industrial production grew robustly in the first quarter, in line with the weak production-related survey indicators since early 2015 it is assessed that the underlying trend in production remains moderate and economic recovery may exhibit a gradual path.
Data on the expenditure side point to an increase in private demand for the first quarter.
In this period, the production and imports of consumer goods posted a quarterly growth, particularly faster for imports.
After the January contraction, sales of home appliances were up month-on-month in February and March, signaling a positive outlook for private consumer demand.
Meanwhile, the rapid increase in automobile sales that contributed significantly to the recent consumption growth continued into April.
Among indicators for investment goods, the production and imports of machinery-equipment recorded a quarterly and yearly decline in the first quarter.
Yet, the robust sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles hint at an improvement in investments.
Hence, it is assessed that private demand continues to recover.
Data on production and sales offer a positive outlook for private demand, yet confidence indices point to downside risks.
The consumer confidence has been weak for a long time.
The BTS data on investment tendency and overall economic activity and TURKSTAT’s confidence indices for retail trade, services, and construction sectors also show that expectations of firms have yet to begin improving.
The lingering volatility in financial markets restrains the improvement of financial conditions.
All these developments suggest that the recovery in private demand will be moderate and gradual.
In the first quarter of 2015, non-gold exports were down while non-gold imports were up from their past quarterly averages.
This outlook is largely driven by exports that have been weaker than domestic demand due to the slowing growth across trading partners.
Nevertheless, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
In February 2015, total and nonfarm unemployment rates decreased by about 0.1 point.
Compared with January, both labor and employment growth slowed across nonfarm sectors.
Construction employment declined, whereas industrial employment remained flat.
Having accelerated from previous periods, the employment growth in services was the major driver of nonfarm employment growth.
The recently released industrial production and survey data show that employment might recover somewhat in the second quarter.
Yet, the current path of economic activity and the weakening investment tendency pose downside risks to employment.
To summarize, external demand remains weak, while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately.
The uncertainty over global markets and the weak course of consumer and investor confidence suggest that economic activity will remain moderate in the upcoming period.
Based on this outlook, the aggregate demand conditions support disinflation.
Moreover, the favorable developments in the terms of trade continue to support the improvement in the current account balance.
Industrial production gained some momentum in the first quarter partly owing to the thriving vehicle production.
Consumer confidence and investment tendency point to a moderate private domestic demand, while leading indicators suggest that external demand is relatively weak.
Recent signs of recovery in Europe might be a development that would boost the external demand.
However, lingering volatility in global financial markets and the weak course of confidence indices are the risk factors that may limit the contribution of the private final demand to growth.
To sum up, external demand remains weak while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately.
Thus, the recovery in economic activity is expected to be gradual and aggregate demand conditions are expected to continue supporting disinflation.
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies continue to have a favorable impact on inflation, especially inflation excluding energy and food (core inflation indicators).
However, recently elevated volatility in the exchange rates has limited the improvement in the core inflation, as stated in the April Inflation Report.
The moderate course of aggregate demand conditions and low levels of international commodity prices support disinflation but the recent fluctuations in energy prices curtail this contribution.
Food prices, which are still at high levels, remain as the main risk factor for inflation.
However, with the introduction of new seasonal products in summer months, food prices are likely to see a notable correction.
Reduced predictability of global economy and increased uncertainties amid the divergence among the monetary policies of advanced economies cause global markets to remain highly data-sensitive.
The Committee assessed that the measures taken to support the FX liquidity, core liabilities and long-term borrowing enhanced the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
Additional measures along these lines may continue to be taken if deemed necessary.
In conclusion, the global market uncertainty and the unfavorable effects of the exchange rate volatility on core inflation coupled with the volatility in energy and food prices make it necessary to maintain the cautious stance in monetary policy.
The implementation of the announced structural reforms is expected to contribute significantly to potential growth.
Any measure that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long- term government securities at low levels.
In May, consumer prices increased by 0.56 percent and annual inflation edged up by 0.2 points to 8.09 percent.
Annual food inflation in this period declined owing to the correction in unprocessed food prices.
On the other hand, energy prices maintained the upward trend amid the developments in crude oil prices.
Being affected by the exchange rate developments, core goods inflation followed an upward course, while services inflation remained high.
Accordingly, the underlying trend of core inflation indicators registered an increase due to core goods.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages fell by 1.55 points to 12.81 percent in May.
This fall was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, and partly by the slowdown in bread and cereal products prices.
Seasonally-adjusted unprocessed food prices registered a decline due to fresh fruits and vegetables.
Early indicators reveal that, amid the increase in product supply, correction in food prices will be more prononunced in June.
Energy prices rose by 1.18 percent in May, and the group’s annual inflation recorded an uptick by 1.8 points and reached 3.38 percent mainly due to the low base.
Domestic energy prices have been following an upward track since February.
This rise is led both by the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the recovery in the international oil prices that hit the bottom in January.
Prices of services rose by 0.77 percent, and the annual services inflation increased slightly to 8.85 percent in May.
This was led by the price developments in restaurants-hotels and transport services, while annual inflation in other sub-groups remained relatively flat.
Cumulative increases in food prices and the ongoing uptrend in meat prices pushed the inflation in restaurants-hotels group further upwards.
Annual inflation in transport services have been receding since almost six months in line with the outlook in international fuel prices.
However, upon the reversal of the downtrend in fuel prices, transport became another service item that recorded an increase in this period.
Against this background, although remaining flat compared in May to the last month, the underlying trend of services stayed high.
Annual inflation in core goods rose by 0.83 points to 5.88 percent in May.
Among sub-groups, annual inflation in durable consumption goods rose by around 2 points to 4.66 percent in this period.
Being led by the recent depreciation of the Turkish lira also against the euro, monthly price increases in durable consumption goods spread across all sub-groups, particularly home appliances and automobiles groups.
Annual inflation was up in clothing, but declined in goods excluding clothing and durable goods.
All in all, the seasonally-adjusted underlying trend of core goods inflation posted a significant increase mostly due to exchange rate pressures.
According to TURKSTAT’s data, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 2.3 percent year-on-year in the first quarter of 2015.
On the production side, the first quarter saw a yearly growth in the value added from non-construction industries.
On the spending side, final domestic demand has increased due to private and public consumption demand.
In this period, the ongoing yet slowing increase in domestic demand drove imports higher while net exports continued to make a negative contribution to annual growth amid declining exports caused by weak external demand.
After the solid growth in February and March, industrial production remained unchanged month-on-month in April.
On a quarterly basis, April’s production level is 2.1 percent above the quarter-ago average.
Survey indicators suggest that there has recently been a slight recovery in the export orders.
Meanwhile, domestic demand is expected to remain on a moderate upward trend.
However, the May strikes, particularly those in the automotive industry, will cause output to drop across vehicle and base metal industries in this period.
In fact, contrary to survey indicators, May survey data point to a plunge in non-gold exports driven by automotive industry exports.
Thus, industrial production is expected to record a monthly fall in May.
Data on the expenditure side suggest that private demand continues to rise in the second quarter, albeit more slowly.
The production and imports of consumer goods grew faster in April than in the first quarter.
Sales of home appliances and automobiles were up in the April-May period from their first-quarter average.
Meanwhile, business survey indicators and consumer confidence indices point to a moderate domestic demand for the April-May period.
Production and imports data related to non-vehicle investments remained flat in April.
Likewise, indicators for the construction industry and companies’ expectations for future investments have yet to signal some recovery in investment spending.
In sum, indicators on the second- quarter suggest that economic activity grows modestly, driven by private consumer demand.
The terms of trade continues to affect the current account balance positively, which however is restrained by the sluggish exports.
Leading indicators point to some increase in the seasonally-adjusted current account deficit in May.
The improvement in the current account balance is expected to resume starting from June with the moderate course of consumer loans and lower energy prices.
In March 2015, unemployment rates were down 0.1 point from the previous period in seasonally-adjusted terms.
Amid non-farm employment losses, unemployment rates declined on falling non-farm labor force.
In this period, construction employment increased whereas industrial and services employment fell.
The drop in services employment mostly reflects a correction of the strong growth in previous months.
Since the last quarter of 2014, non-farm employment growth has been driven by the services sector, while the increase in industrial and construction employment have been small.
The industrial production tendency and survey indicators suggest that employment might see some recovery in the second quarter.
Yet, other leading indicators have been signaling that non-farm employment gains are very limited, thus tempering any expectations of a significant decline in unemployment.
The current pace of economic activity and the weakening investment tendency pose downside risks to employment.
Loans continue to expand at a reasonable pace in response to the tight monetary stance and the macroprudential measures.
The recent tightening in the overall financial conditions is expected to further slow down loan growth slightly in the second half of the year.
The composition of loans continues to evolve in the desired direction, with commercial loans growing at a faster pace than consumer loans.
In addition, consumer loans excluding home loans grow at a more modest pace.
External demand remains weak while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately.
The current course of global demand dampens the improvement in the current account balance.
The economic recovery in Europe affects external demand positively but the ongoing geopolitical tensions and the slowing global trade will cause exports to remain weak for some time.
The decline in cumulative energy imports is expected to have a further favorable impact on the current account balance, if the current levels of oil prices are maintained.
Overall, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance, while the relatively weaker exports limit this improvement.
The Committee stated that the inflation outlook has yet to display the desired improvement.
Although a partial correction in food prices is expected to ease inflation in the short term, the recent exchange rate movements have delayed the improvement in core inflation.
This, combined with the uncertainty in global markets and volatility in energy and food prices, makes it necessary to maintain the cautious stance in monetary policy.
The Committee has therefore decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.
Global markets still pose significant risks.
The reduced predictability of global economy and the increased uncertainties amid the divergence among the monetary policies of advanced economies cause global markets to remain highly data- sensitive.
The Committee underlined that, besides cyclical policies to stabilize capital flows, structural measures to enhance the resilience of the financial system are important as well.
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that the measures implemented to support the FX liquidity, core liabilities, and long-term borrowing have enhanced the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
Additional measures along these lines may be adopted if deemed necessary.
Sustained fiscal discipline has become a fundamental element in reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks in recent years.
In the current environment of highly uncertain global markets, the value added from maintaining and further advancing these achievements is significant.
Any measure that would ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In June, consumer prices decreased by 0.51 percent, bringing annual consumer inflation down by about 0.9 points to 7.20 percent.
With the ongoing correction in food prices, the decline in annual food inflation became more pronounced.
Changes in crude oil prices drove energy inflation lower, yet the depreciation of Turkish lira constrained the disinflation.
Core goods inflation was slightly up due to exchange rate effects while services inflation remained elevated.
Thus, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend of core inflation indicators followed a flat course.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages was down by 3.54 points in June to 9.28 percent.
This decline was largely caused by unprocessed food prices, while annual processed food inflation continued to slow.
May’s fresh fruit and vegetable-driven drop in seasonally-adjusted unprocessed food prices continued into this period at a stronger pace thanks to increased supply.
However, red meat prices remained on the rise, affecting inflation negatively in associated categories such as processed food and catering services.
After an upsurge since February, energy prices decreased by 0.17 percent in June, bringing annual energy inflation down by 0.6 points to 2.78 percent.
The fall in energy prices was mostly attributed to bottled gas and fuel prices, while indicators for July point to a continued decrease in energy prices.
Prices of services were up 0.88 percent in June while annual services inflation remained unchanged at 8.85 percent, mostly due to restaurants-hotels and other services.
Annual inflation in rents and transport, on the other hand, decreased.
Despite the significant correction in food prices over the past two months, annual restaurants-hotels inflation remained on the rise amid the ongoing upsurge in red meat prices.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in the subgroup of other services increased due to rising prices of package holidays.
As a result, underlying trend of services inflation remained flat at an elevated level.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.09 points to 5.97 percent in June.
Annual inflation was up in durable goods due to base effects but down in other main categories.
The substantial April-May price hikes were replaced by a slowdown in June across categories where exchange rate pass-through to prices is relatively faster, such as home appliances and automobiles.
Prices of automobiles increased only modestly, while prices of furniture and electric/nonelectric appliances went down.
On the other hand, core goods excluding clothing and durable goods continued to reflect the effects of cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Hence, underlying trend of core goods inflation registered a small increase in June.
Industrial production declined by 2 percent in May on a monthly basis.
This fall stemmed mainly from the production loss led by strikes in the automotive sector.
The lowering effect on industrial production of the contraction in the production of vehicles is expected to be compensated for in the coming months.
On a quarterly basis, the production level in the April-May period is 1 percent higher than the average production in the previous quarter.
Assessing the PMI and BTS data together, a strong rebound is not expected in industrial production in the second quarter.
Data on the expenditure side suggest that production and imports of consumption goods increased in the April-May period compared to the average of the previous quarter.
Domestic sales of home appliances recorded an uptick in this period.
Likewise, sales of automobiles in the second quarter stood above the first-quarter average.
Consumer confidence, on the other hand, continued to weaken due to geopolitical risks and uncertainties in global markets.
Among investment indicators, production and imports of machinery-equipment posted a decline in the April-May period in comparison to the average of the previous quarter.
Production and imports of mineral products, among the indicators for construction investment, registered an increase in the same period.
Construction employment remained flat in April.
Investment tendency maintained its sluggish course in the second quarter of 2015.
Accordingly, domestic private demand is expected to contribute to growth moderately in the second quarter.
Following the contraction in the first quarter, the export quantity index excluding gold increased at a modest rate in the April-May period compared to the previous quarter, while the import quantity index excluding gold maintained its upward trend.
This suggests that the contribution of external demand to growth may be limited in the second quarter.
The weak course of the global economy and the ongoing geopolitical developments put a cap on export growth.
On the other hand, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans continue to contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
In April 2015, total and non-farm unemployment rates fell by 0.1 and 0.2 points, respectively.
Employment in non-farm sectors rose while the increase in labor force was limited, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate.
Employment in the industrial and services sectors rose, while construction employment fell in this period.
Since the last quarter of 2014, non-farm employment growth has been driven by the services sector, while the industrial and construction employment have fluctuated around a flat trend.
The industrial production and survey indicators suggest that the contribution of industrial sector to employment will be limited also in the upcoming period.
Services employment is anticipated to grow at a slower pace in the upcoming period owing also to the stagnant tourism sector.
Accordingly, unemployment is not expected to record a notable decline in the rest of the year.
The current course of economic activity and the weakening investment tendency pose downside risks to employment.
In sum, data on the second quarter of 2015 suggest a mild course in economic activity.
Meanwhile, geopolitical risks and uncertainties in global markets besides the weak course of consumer and investor confidence pose some risks to growth in the upcoming period .
The Committee assessed the medium-term projections to be presented in the July Inflation Report.
Inflation in the second quarter proved close to the forecasts of the April Inflation Report, while core inflation stood above the projections.
In this period, the fall in food inflation became the main driver of the improvement in inflation, while core inflation rose mostly because of the exchange rate effects.
Analyzing the assumptions and external conditions that underlie the inflation forecasts, the end-2015 inflation forecast is revised slightly upwards in view of the developments in import and food prices besides the rise in core inflation driven by the exchange rate.
The Committee assesses that that the partial recovery in food prices accompanied by the cautious monetary policy will limit the deterioration in the inflation outlook and inflation will reach the target in the medium term.
Unprocessed food inflation had been quite unfavorable in the first quarter, leading inflation to post high figures.
However, recently there has been a notable correction in food prices, which has affected inflation favorably.
Similarly, the recent decline in oil prices supports disinflation.
On the other hand, exchange rate movements have been especially influential in the core goods group, delaying the recovery in the core inflation trend.
This delay, combined with the uncertainty in global markets and volatility in energy and food prices, makes it necessary to maintain the cautious stance in monetary policy.
Inflation expectations, pricing behaviors and other factors affecting inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Besides the cautious monetary stance, additional foreign exchange liquidity measures may be adopted, if exchange rate movements continue to delay the fall in inflation.
Commercial loans have recently been following a robust course of growth, while consumer loans lost pace due to the items excluding housing.
Additionally, commercial loans grow faster than consumer loans in line with the desired loan composition.
Owing also to the recent partial tightening in financial conditions, total credit growth is expected to slow somewhat in the second half of the year.
This loan outlook not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures, but also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
Although the recovery in the European economy affects the external demand positively, ongoing geopolitical developments and the slowdown in global trade restrict the export growth.
Meanwhile, cumulative energy imports will continue to decline if the current low levels of oil prices are maintained.
As a result, favorable developments in the terms of trade and the mild course of consumer loans support the recovery in the current account balance, yet the relatively weak export outlook limits this recovery.
Domestic demand, on the other hand, exhibits a mild increase driven mainly by consumption.
Meanwhile, the weak course of confidence indices coupled with domestic and external uncertainties are the risk factors that may restrict the contribution of the final private demand to growth.
In this context, it is projected that the recovery in economic activity will be gradual, and the aggregate demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.
to global markets remain significant.
Reduced predictability of the global economy and increased uncertainties amid the divergence among the monetary policies of advanced economies cause global markets to remain highly data- sensitive.
Accordingly, recent measures implemented to support the FX liquidity, core liabilities, and long-term borrowing have enhanced the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
The Committee has stated that additional measures along these lines may be adopted if deemed necessary.
Following the global crisis, especially during the exit process of the US monetary policy, long-term rates in emerging economies have grown excessively sensitive to global monetary policies.
The wide interest rate corridor and the tight liquidity policy implemented by the CBRT increased the resilience of our economy against global shocks during this period.
In the upcoming period, following the start of normalization of global monetary policies, volatility in long-term interest rates may decline permanently thanks to forward guidance policies.
According to this baseline scenario, the need for a wide interest rate corridor in our country may diminish over time.
In that case, the operational framework of the CBRT’s interest rate policy may be simplified gradually.
Members of the Committee asked the technical departments to complete the preparations in this direction and to present them in August meeting.
Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
In July, consumer prices increased by 0.09 percent while annual inflation was down 0.39 points to 6.81 percent.
Annual food inflation was flat month-on-month whereas falling oil prices brought annual energy inflation down.
Services inflation declined while core goods inflation rose slightly due to exchange rate pass-through.
The underlying trend of core inflation displayed a slight improvement.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages remained flat at 9.25 percent in July.
Annual inflation was slightly up in unprocessed food but continued to slow in processed food.
On the unprocessed food front, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables remained favorable, whereas meat prices continued to rise.
Among processed food items, prices of bread and cereals continued to affect inflation favorably whereas prices of other items slightly accelerated.
Annual energy inflation decreased to 1.58 percent amid falling fuel prices driven by lower oil prices.
With the ongoing plunge in oil prices in July, annual energy inflation is expected to slow further in August.
Prices of services were up 0.80 percent in July while annual services inflation dropped by 0.43 points to 8.42 percent.
Amid higher meat prices, prices of catering services continued to soar in July.
Annual inflation increased in rents and restaurants-hotels but fell in communication and transport items due to base effects.
Overall, the underlying trend of services inflation posted a month-on-month improvement.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.09 points to 6.05 percent in July.
Annual inflation was up in durable goods, down in clothing and flat in core goods excluding clothing and durables.
Prices of durable goods reflected the pass-through effect from exchange rate movements.
Thanks to the favorable course in clothing prices, the underlying trend of core goods inflation registered a fall.
The industrial production index increased strongly by 2.4 percent month-on-month in June.
Accordingly, industrial production grew by 1.6 percent quarter-on-quarter and 3.9 percent year-on-year in the second quarter of 2015.
The strong production growth in June does not signify an acceleration in economic activity and is rather a result of compensating for the output loss led by the May strikes in the auto industry and expediting production before Ramadan.
In fact, leading indicators for July and August suggest that the industrial production might moderate in the second half of the year.
Data on the expenditure side indicate that private consumption demand expanded further in the second quarter while investments remained weak.
Production and imports of consumption goods were higher in the second quarter compared to their averages in the previous quarter.
Meanwhile, production and imports of capital goods excluding vehicles fell in the second quarter.
Indicators for the construction industry do not hint at a recovery for construction activity.
After declining dramatically in May amid strikes, domestic sales of automobiles registered month- on-month gains in June and July.
Thus, having contributed substantially to consumption lately, sales of automobiles are believed to have supported consumption further in July.
On the other hand, the PMI for the July-August period and the Business Tendency Survey order indicators for July do not signal a solid domestic demand.
Likewise, consumer confidence indices remained weak in July.
Firms’ expectations for future investments increased slightly in July but remained sluggish.
In sum, current indicators point to a moderate outlook for consumption demand yet signal no recovery for investments.
After the first-quarter decline, the non-gold quantity index, an indicator for external demand, posted a quarter-on-quarter increase in the second quarter.
Non-gold imports, on the other hand, grew modestly in the second quarter.
As a consequence, deterioration in the real rebalancing process since mid-2014 somewhat reversed in the second quarter of 2015.
Amid lower energy prices, the current account balance is expected to improve further in the upcoming period.
However, the relatively weak outlook of exports and the likely fall in tourism revenues may dampen this improvement.
In May, seasonally adjusted total and nonfarm unemployment rates climbed by 0.2 and 0.3 points month-on-month, respectively.
Although employment continued to expand in nonfarm sectors, unemployment increased due to the rising labor force participation, which was flat for some time.
Industrial and services employment grew in this period, whereas construction employment declined.
Industrial employment expanded at a stronger pace than in previous periods, providing the biggest contribution to nonfarm employment growth.
Industrial production and survey indicators suggest that the industrial sector will contribute mildly to employment in the forthcoming period.
The support from services was more limited due to the sluggish tourism industry.
The contribution from the services industry to employment is expected to remain below early 2015 levels in the upcoming period.
Thus, prospects for a robust employment growth are slim for the remainder of the year.
The economic outlook and the waning investment tendency pose a downside risk to the labor market.
To sum up, in the second quarter, external demand remained weak while domestic demand contributed to growth moderately.
Current indicators suggest a similar outlook for the July-August period.
Yet, uncertainties in global markets and the weak course of consumer and investor confidence add to the downside risks to growth for the upcoming period.
Loan growth continues to expand at a reasonable pace in response to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
Commercial loan growth remains robust while consumer loans continues to decelerate.
Recent tightening in financial conditions is likely to have some slowing impact on loan growth in the upcoming period.
Overall, the pace and the composition of loans limit medium-term inflationary pressures and contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Recent data releases signal no significant change in the macroeconomic outlook.
The favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
External demand remains weak, while domestic demand contributes to growth moderately.
Domestic demand, on the other hand, exhibits a modest upward trend driven mainly by consumption.
Although available data point to an ongoing moderate growth for economic activity, recent developments necessitate close monitoring of forward-looking signals.
Recently, rising risk premiums due to global and domestic uncertainty have led to a tightening in financial conditions.
This, coupled with the already weak confidence indices, creates downside risks regarding the domestic demand for the second half of the year.
Committee members stated that the inflation outlook has not displayed the desirable improvement yet.
Although processed food and energy price developments affect inflation favorably in the short run, the cumulative exchange rate movements since early 2015 delay the recovery in the core inflation trend.
Against this backdrop, the Committee stated that a slightly tighter monetary policy stance might be necessary to counterbalance the upside risks to inflation.
The Committee indicated that the inflation outlook and the risks would be instrumental for the exact implementation of the monetary tightening.
Due to the imminent economic slowdown, exchange rate pass-through to domestic prices will be more limited than implied by historical estimations.
Moreover, falling commodity prices partly offset the exchange rate effect.
Meanwhile, downside risks to global economy and domestic economic activity remain significant.
Accordingly, the Committee agreed to adopt a flexible approach for the implementation of the monetary tightening at this point and follow the consequences closely to review the situation at the next meeting.
In conclusion, given the uncertainty over domestic and global markets and the volatility in energy and food prices, the Committee decided to implement a tighter liquidity policy for as long as deemed necessary.
The Committee also evaluated the strategy to be pursued before and after the global monetary policy normalization, and decided to implement policy measures in three dimensions: (i) interest rate and Turkish lira liquidity, (ii) FX liquidity, and (iii) policies regarding financial stability.
It was concluded that, considering the current global and domestic circumstances, the policies need to be tight for the Turkish lira, stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive for financial stability.
The Committee decided to publish the related document on the website.
A significant of the meeting focused on the simplification of the monetary policy framework.
The Committee suggested that monetary policy framework may be simplified by gradually narrowing the interest rate corridor during global monetary policy normalization.
It was stated that, eventually one week repo rate will assume the role of policy rate and represent the stance of monetary policy.
The Committee underlined that structural measures to support financial stability are as important as the cyclical policies to stabilize capital flows.
Accordingly, the published roadmap included measures to support the FX liquidity and to provide incentives for core liabilities and long-term borrowing.
The Committee stated that the past measures on this front have already enhanced the resilience of the economy and that additional measures may further bolster these gains.
In August, consumer prices increased by 0.40 percent, and annual inflation edged up by 0.33 points to 7.14 percent.
In this period, consumer prices were affected by the lagged impact of the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Annual food inflation increased, whereas falling oil prices continued to pull energy inflation down.
Annual inflation in core goods and services edged up, leading to an increase in core inflation indicators.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that the underlying recent trend of inflation slowed down, yet remained at high levels.
Following the flat course in July, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.46 points to 9.71 percent in August.
Soaring fruit prices was the main driver of the increase in food inflation.
Moreover, meat prices continued to increase, contributing to the upside movement in the unprocessed food inflation.
On the processed food front, the downward trend in annual inflation continued, but monthly price increase remained still high at 0.83 percent.
Leading indicators on September inflation point that annual unprocessed food inflation may post another increase with rising fresh fruits and vegetables prices.
Meanwhile, energy prices went down by 0.76 percent in August and continued to affect inflation favorably.
With the ongoing decline in crude oil prices, annual energy inflation receded to 1.26 percent.
Prices of services rose by 1.14 percent in August, and annual services inflation crept up by 0.24 points to 8.65 percent.
In this period annual inflation increased across all main subcategories except transport, reflecting the effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Ongoing cost pressures driven by food inflation pushed prices in the restaurants-hotels group up by 2.05 percent, leading this group to hit the highest monthly inflation of the last nine years.
On the other hand, amid the low course of crude oil prices, annual inflation in transport services remained at modest levels.
Overall, underlying trend of services inflation edged up in August.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.52 points to 6.58 percent in August.
Cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira has adversely affected prices in the core goods group, especially the durable goods.
Durable goods annual inflation increased to 7.04 percent, led by the rising of prices electrical and non-electrical appliances.
Indicators on September point that exchange rate pass-through will continue to affect the prices of durable consumption goods.
Committee (the Committee) assessed that developments in energy prices continue to affect inflation favorably, yet exchange rate movements delay the improvement in the core inflation trend.
According to TurkStat, GDP grew by an annual 3.8 percent in the second quarter of 2015.
Final domestic demand increased on the back of both private and public sectors, with private demand registering a stronger growth.
Private consumption and private investments, respectively, contributed the most to the second quarter’s annual growth.
The imports expanded with the continued rise in domestic demand while the weak foreign demand brought exports down, causing net exports to contribute negatively to annual growth.
In July, industrial production decreased by 1.5 percent month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms, falling below the second-quarter average by 0.9 percent.
This production drop is largely attributed to the correction of June’s sharp increase and the reduced number of working days due to factors such as bridge days.
Leading indicators for August signal a mild rise in production.
Data on the expenditure side indicate that domestic demand may be more moderate in the second half than in the first half.
In July, the production of consumption goods posted a monthly decline whereas the imports of consumption goods grew on the back of automobiles demand.
The strong uptrend in the sales of automobiles slowed somewhat during July-August period.
Sales of home appliances were slightly down during July-August compared to the second quarter.
Consumer confidence indices continue to weaken as of August.
Indicators for the construction industry do not reveal a robust recovery in construction activity, while firms’ expectations for future investments hint at no significant improvement.
Due to the first half’s weaker exports and rising consumption demand, the current account balance ceased to improve.
Data for August and September point to a slowing import demand while export orders seem to have recovered slightly.
The growth composition is expected to shift gradually towards net exports over the upcoming period thanks to a rising demand from EU members.
Amid this composition change and lower oil prices, the improvement in the current account balance is expected to be more significant in the forthcoming period.
In June, nonfarm employment remained flat while labor force participation continued to rise.
Thus, unemployment rates registered an increase.
Services employment remained on the rise whereas industrial and construction employment decreased marginally.
Industrial production and survey indicators suggest that industrial employment may fail to contribute to nonfarm employment growth in the third quarter after the modest first-half increase.
Taken with the other leading indicators, no major gains are expected for employment in the upcoming period.
The economic outlook and the weak investment tendency pose a downside risk to employment.
To sum up, current indicators suggest that domestic demand growth is likely to be more moderate in the forthcoming period than in the first half of the year.
Uncertainties in global markets and the weak course of confidence indices add to the downside risks to the growth outlook and employment.
Thus, demand conditions are likely to support disinflation.
Annual loan growth continues at reasonable levels in response to the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures.
The Committee highlighted that loan growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions recently.
Specifically, FX commercial loans and consumer loans have lost significant momentum in recent weeks, which, as evaluated by the Committee, is mostly demand-driven.
External demand remained weak in the first half of the year, while domestic demand contributed to growth moderately.
The weak consumer confidence and the recent sales data point to a slowdown in consumption demand for the second half of the year.
The recent increase in relative prices of investment and durable goods will curb the demand in these sectors.
Accordingly, imports are expected to slow in the upcoming period.
On the exports front, despite the negative impact of geopolitical developments, the rising demand from EU members is likely to affect Turkey’s exports positively.
Against this background, the Committee expects the growth composition to shift gradually towards net exports in the upcoming period, which will have a favorable impact on the current account balance.
Moreover, the developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Accordingly, the current account balance is expected to display a significant improvement starting with the August figures.
Energy price developments continue to affect inflation favorably.
The upward impact of the exchange rate developments on inflation is partly offset by lower oil prices.
Yet, the accumulated pass-through from exchange rate developments delay the recovery in the core inflation trend.
Leading indicators signal that the exchange rate pass-through to domestic prices continue to exert upside pressures on inflation.
Considering these developments and the recent increase in inflation expectations, the Committee stated that the overall pricing behavior should be monitored closely.
Food prices remain volatile.
Even though unprocessed food prices are expected to post a downward correction in the final quarter, the course of food prices as of September poses an upside risk to the year-end food inflation forecast.
In addition, the ongoing volatility across global markets necessitates a cautious monetary stance.
Overall, considering the impact of the uncertainty in domestic and global markets on inflation expectations and taking into account the volatility in energy and food prices, the Committee decided to maintain the tight liquidity stance as long as deemed necessary.
Inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
The Committee also assessed the measures already implemented and to be implemented in the context of the “road map during the normalization of global monetary policies”.
The measures announced within the road map has largely been put into effect over the last one month.
Accordingly, further measures were taken to support the FX liquidity, core liabilities and long-term borrowing.
Moreover, the operational framework of the liquidity policy was simplified.
In this respect, the overnight borrowing facility provided for primary dealers via repo transactions was terminated and collateral conditions were simplified.
According to the Committee, the arrangements regarding the use of FX deposits as collateral for TL operations will increase the efficiency of the banks’ liquidity management practices.
It was underlined that all these steps will continue to boost the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
The Committee reiterated that the Central Bank’s current monetary policy stance can be summarized as tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for FX liquidity, and supportive for financial stability.
The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
In September, consumer prices increased by 0.89 percent, and annual inflation rose by 0.81 points to 7.95 percent.
Annual food inflation remained on an upward trend as it did in previous month.
Meanwhile, the depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed annual inflation in energy and core goods upwards.
Annual services inflation, on the other hand, slowed somewhat, yet maintained its high levels.
In this period, annual inflation of core indicators and their seasonally adjusted underlying trend increased due to the core goods prices.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by around 1 point to 10.73 percent in September.
This rise was led by unprocessed food inflation that reached 13.23 percent annually driven particularly by the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, most notably fruits.
On the processed food front, the monthly price increase proved lower than the last two months with 0.63 percent and the downward trend in annual inflation continued.
Leading indicators of October show that annual food inflation may decline due to the unprocessed food prices.
Energy prices went up by 0.53 percent and amid the depreciation in the Turkish lira, the annual energy inflation rose by around 0.7 point to 1.95 percent in September.
Prices of services rose by 0.79 percent in September, and annual services inflation edged down by 0.11 points to 8.54 percent.
In this period, annual inflation increased in communication and other services, but decreased in transport and the restaurants-hotels groups.
Due to the lagged effects of oil prices, annual transport service inflation maintained its slowing trend.
Meanwhile, the course of food prices continued to have a negative effect on the restaurants-hotels group.
Against this background, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an almost flat course in September maintaining its high level.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 1.37 points to 7.94 percent in September.
Cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira has adversely affected prices in the core goods group, especially the durable goods in this period.
Accordingly, prices of durable goods increased by 2.68 percent on a monthly basis, and price hikes particularly in automobiles and home appliances stood out.
Moreover, prices of core goods excluding clothing and durables, where the exchange rate effects are observed with a relatively longer lag, also recorded an upsurge on a monthly basis.
Thus, seasonally-adjusted indicators show a notable deterioration in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
October indicators point that exchange rate pressures continue to affect the prices of durable consumption goods.
In August, industrial production increased by 2.9 percent month-on-month, rising above the second-quarter average by 0.7 percent in the July-August period.
However, current data signal a weak outlook for September’s industrial production.
The 3 nonworking days due to the Feast of Sacrifice in September is expected to translate into a sharp drop in the annual percentage change of the raw data.
BTS, PMI and export indicators also point to a weaker industrial production for September.
Yet, in quarterly terms, industrial production is likely to post a moderate growth in the third quarter.
In the first half of the year, external demand remained weak, while contribution to growth came mainly from domestic demand.
Data on the expenditure side suggest a more moderate demand outlook in the third quarter relative to the first half of the year.
During the July-August period, the production of consumption goods declined.
The imports of consumption goods, on the other hand, remained flat on the back of rising imports of automobiles despite the fall in most of the other subcategories.
In the third quarter, sales of automobiles and home appliances were slightly down quarter-on-quarter.
Consumer confidence indices continued to weaken in September.
During the July-August period, the production of non-transport capital goods increased whereas their imports dropped.
Indicators for the construction industry do not point to a robust recovery in construction activity, while firms’ expectations for future investments remain low.
The non-gold exports volume index is expected to increase in the third quarter whereas the imports index may decline in line with the weakening domestic demand.
The growth composition is expected to shift gradually towards net exports over the upcoming period thanks to a rising demand from the EU countries.
This composition change and the favorable developments in the terms of trade along with the moderate course of consumer loans support the improvement in the current account balance.
Data for September and October indicate that the marked August improvement in the current account balance continues recently.
In July, unemployment rates came down due to nonfarm employment growth.
Services employment continued to make a sustained contribution to employment growth, while construction employment picked up after having fallen since the first quarter.
Thus, the average annual employment growth equaled 3.4 percent for the January-July period.
Industrial production and survey indicators suggest that industrial employment, which posted a modest increase in the first half, may fail to contribute to nonfarm employment growth in the third quarter.
Being considered with other leading indicators, a moderate employment growth outlook is expected to continue in the upcoming period.
To sum up, current indicators suggest that domestic demand is likely to be more moderate in the forthcoming period than in the first half of the year, while external demand might see some recovery.
Uncertainties in global markets and the weak course of confidence indices add to the downside risks to the growth and employment outlook, yet the rebalancing in the growth composition supports the improvement in the current account balance.
Against this background, aggregate demand conditions are likely to support disinflation.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term forecasts to be presented in the October Inflation Report.
In the third quarter, inflation surpassed the forecast of July Inflation Report due to food prices and exchange rate changes.
Unprocessed food inflation increased, while core inflation remained high amid cumulative depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Based on the assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and the external conditions, the end-2015 inflation forecast is revised upward in view of revisions to import prices and the exchange rate-driven upsurge in core inflation.
Inflation is expected to hover around current levels for some time due to the effects of the exchange rates and start declining afterwards.
The negative impact of cumulative exchange rate developments since early 2015 on the inflation outlook is partly offset by lower oil prices.
Food prices, on the other hand, remain volatile mainly due to unprocessed food prices, which poses both upside and downside risks to the year-end inflation forecast.
The cumulative Turkish lira depreciation caused the annual core goods inflation to rise and the core inflation to deteriorate slightly.
However, the tight monetary stance and the moderate domestic demand limit the exchange rate pass-through to prices compared to similar periods in previous years.
Accordingly, considering the impact of the uncertainty in domestic and global markets on inflation expectations and taking into account the volatility in energy and food prices, the Committee decided to maintain the tight liquidity stance as long as deemed necessary.
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the inflation outlook.
Taking into account inflation expectations, pricing behavior and the course of other factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained.
The Committee highlighted that loan growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions caused by recently increased domestic and external uncertainties.
Specifically, commercial loans denominated in foreign currency and consumer loans have lost significant momentum.
With respect to the composition of loans, commercial loans continue to grow faster than consumer loans.
This composition not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures, but also helps to improve the current account balance.
In addition to the moderate economic activity, rising loan rates and the tightening of other financial conditions also signal that loan growth may remain lower than past years’ averages in the upcoming period.
Final domestic demand was the main driver of growth in the first half of 2015, while external demand remained weak.
Indicators for the third-quarter point to a moderate economic activity, whereas the composition of growth hints at a slight slowdown in domestic demand and a recovery in exports.
The weak consumer confidence and tighter financial conditions curb private consumption and investment demand.
The slowing domestic demand and the changes in real exchange rates drive imports lower.
On the exports front, despite the negative impact of geopolitical developments, the rising demand from EU members affects Turkey’s exports positively.
Against this background, the Committee expects the growth composition to shift gradually in favor of net exports in the upcoming period.
This shift is expected to have a positive impact on the current account balance.
Moreover, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the sluggish course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Accordingly, the improvement in the current account balance which became evident with the August figures is expected to continue.
Uncertainties surrounding global monetary policies and concerns over global growth cause financial markets to remain volatile.
Thus, portfolio flows to emerging economies and risk indicators follow a highly volatile pattern.
The Committee stated that the measures announced by the CBRT within the context of the “road map during the normalization of global monetary policies” boost the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
The current monetary policy stance is tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive of financial stability.
In case that the decline in loan growth rates become permanent and exchange rates continue to face upward pressure over the upcoming period, in addition to preserving the tight monetary policy stance, the Committee may take measures to support the Turkish lira and loan growth by easing the conditions for the use of foreign currency denominated collateral.
In October, consumer prices increased by 1.55 percent, and annual inflation edged down by 0.37 points to 7.58 percent.
Annual food inflation declined on account of the unprocessed food prices, while the annual energy inflation decreased due to the base effect.
Meanwhile, the depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed annual inflation in core goods upwards.
Annual services inflation, on the other hand, maintained its high levels.
Accordingly, annual inflation of core indicators and their seasonally adjusted underlying trend registered increases.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages declined by around 2 points to 8.69 percent in October.
This decline was led by annual unprocessed food inflation that receded to 9.40 percent driven particularly by the prices of vegetables.
On the processed food front, the downward trend in annual inflation continued.
Leading indicators of November show that annual food inflation may increase due to the unprocessed food prices.
Energy prices went up by 0.77 percent while the annual energy inflation decreased by around 1.8 points to 0.12 percent due to base effect in October.
Prices of services rose by 0.71 percent in October, and annual services inflation edged up by 0.11 points to 8.65 percent.
Annual inflation decreased in the restaurants-hotels group, remained flat in rent and increased in other services.
Meanwhile, prices of catering services maintained the upward trend and the annual inflation in this group, with 14.87 percent, remained as the determinant of the high course of prices of services.
Against this background, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an almost flat course in October maintaining its high level.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 1.25 points to 9.19 percent in October.
The cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed the prices of core goods by 1.75 percent on a monthly basis.
Witnessing the exchange rate effects with a longer lag, the annual inflation in core goods excluding clothing and durables reached 8.49 percent.
Moreover, the clothing group recorded the highest October price increase of the index history.
Accordingly, seasonally-adjusted data showed a sustained increase in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
Committee (the Committee) assessed that developments in energy prices continue to affect inflation favorably, yet cumulative effects of the exchange rate movements delay the improvement in the core inflation trend.
After the sharp monthly increase in August, industrial production remained flat in September, thus recording a quarterly growth of 1.1 percent in the third quarter.
Due to fewer working days in September, industrial production declined by a yearly 7.9 percent, yet it might pick up again year-on-year thanks to October’s increased working days.
The BTS data on production over the last three months and the PMI indicators point to a moderate monthly growth for October.
Industrial production has become increasingly volatile due to bridge days and the changing number of working days.
Yet, seasonally and calendar adjusted three-month averages suggest that production remains on the rise.
The production and imports of consumption goods declined in the third quarter.
The retail sales volume index slowed quarter-on-quarter, while non-food retail sales posted a quarterly contraction in the third quarter.
After a robust second-quarter, imports of investment goods were down in the third quarter on a quarterly basis.
Data on construction employment and the production and imports of minerals indicate a stable pattern in construction investments.
All in all, domestic demand is likely to provide a modest contribution to growth in the third quarter.
The non-gold exports volume index rose in the third quarter whereas the imports index fell in line with moderate domestic demand.
Therefore, the growth composition appears to be shifting in favor of net exports thanks to the rising demand from the EU countries.
Recent data indicate a marked improvement in the seasonally adjusted current account balance.
Thus, the current account balance in annual terms is expected to improve further.
Among BTS indicators, export orders over the last three months have seen expectations grow increasingly optimistic since early third quarter, while domestic orders have recovered recently after the weak course of the first three quarters.
Moreover, the consumer confidence increased notably amid lessening domestic uncertainty.
Likewise, expectations for investment and employment continued to improve.
Against this background, confidence and revenue channels are expected to boost domestic demand in the upcoming period.
Non-farm unemployment remained flat in August due to the falling labor force participation, while non-farm employment decreased.
By sectors, employment picked up slightly in services and construction but declined in the industrial sector for the third period in a row.
Thus, the average annual non-farm employment growth equaled 3 percent in the January-August period.
Having trended upward for the first three quarters, industrial production is expected to remain on the rise through the rest of the year.
Survey indicators for industrial employment also point to a recovery in September and October.
Accordingly, the fall in industrial employment is likely to be temporary.
Given the economic outlook, the modest growth in services and construction employment is expected to continue.
To sum up, domestic demand appears to follow a more moderate course in the second half of the year, while external demand makes an increased contribution to growth.
The recovery in European economy affects external demand positively, whereas geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk to external demand.
Meanwhile, the reduced domestic uncertainty drives consumer confidence and expectations of investment and employment higher, which are expected to help to support the recovery of domestic demand over the upcoming period.
Hence, aggregate demand conditions are likely to provide further support for disinflation.
Yet, loan growth has seen some deceleration recently.
The Committee expects loans to return to the moderate growth path amid normalized financial conditions over the upcoming period.
Indicators for the second half of the year point to a moderate economic activity.
Industrial production continued to grow in the third quarter as well after the first half of the year.
In this period, the non-gold exports volume index increased whereas the imports index fell.
The rising demand in the European economy affects Turkey’s exports positively while geopolitical developments put downward pressure on external demand.
Both the recent recovery of the confidence index and the improving expectations for investment and employment are likely to bolster domestic demand.
Accordingly, the Committee assesses that the growth composition has shifted in favor of net exports.
In addition to this shift, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the sluggish course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Given the recent notable improvement in the seasonally-adjusted current account balance, the annual current account deficit is expected to narrow further.
The negative impact of cumulative exchange rate developments since the beginning of the year on the inflation outlook is partly offset by lower oil prices.
Food prices, on the other hand, remain volatile mainly due to unprocessed food prices.
The cumulative Turkish lira depreciation caused the annual core goods inflation to rise and the core inflation trend to deteriorate slightly.
Thus, considering the impact of the global market uncertainty on inflation expectations and the volatility in energy and unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
Taking into account inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and developments in other factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained.
Therefore, portfolio flows to emerging economies follow a volatile pattern.
Despite having improved somewhat recently, risk premia and exchange rate volatilities remain high.
The current monetary policy stance continues to be tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive of financial stability.
In case the decline in loan growth rates becomes permanent and exchange rates continue to face upward pressure over the upcoming period, in addition to preserving the tight monetary policy stance, the Committee may take measures to support the Turkish lira and the loan growth by easing the conditions for the use of foreign currency denominated collateral.
In November, consumer prices increased by 0.67 percent, and annual inflation edged up by 0.52 points to 8.10 percent.
Annual food inflation increased on account of the unprocessed food prices, while the annual energy inflation rose due to the base effect.
Meanwhile, the effects of depreciation in the Turkish lira, albeit waning, pushed annual inflation in core goods further upwards.
Annual services inflation maintained its high levels.
Thus, annual inflation of core indicators recorded an increase, while the underlying trend of inflation implied by seasonally adjusted data remained flat.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.83 points to 9.51 percent in November.
This was driven by annual unprocessed food inflation that climbed to 11.48 percent mostly due to rising prices of vegetables.
Energy prices edged down by 0.31 percent in tandem with the decline in fuel prices, while the annual energy inflation increased to 1.26 percent due to base effect in November.
The annual energy inflation is projected to increase further in December on account of the base effect.
Prices of services increased by 0.17 percent, and annual services inflation rose by 0.16 points to 8.80 percent in November.
Annual inflation slowed in the restaurants- hotels group, but edged up in other sub-groups.
The seasonally-adjusted data indicated a slight slowdown in the underlying trend of services inflation in November.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.41 points to 9.61 percent in November.
The cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira continued to affect core inflation despite alleviating in certain items.
Monthly price increases in durable goods decelerated in November following higher levels in the preceding two months.
However, clothing prices remained on an increasing path.
As a consequence, seasonally-adjusted data indicated an increase in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
Meanwhile, the annual inflation in core goods excluding clothing and durables reached 8.67 percent in November.
In sum, lagged effects of the exchange rate movements continued to delay the improvement in inflation, but the decline in oil prices contained this effect.
Against this backdrop, core inflation remained on an upward trend in November.
According to data released by TURKSTAT, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 4.0 percent year-on-year in the third quarter of 2015.
In seasonally-adjusted terms, national income maintained its robust growth, posting an increase by 1.3 percent quarter-on-quarter.
On the expenditure side, net exports made a considerably high contribution to quarterly growth amid the rise in exports and decline in imports.
Consumption spending continued to expand, while investment spending remained relatively weak in this quarter.
Owing to the base effect from number of working days, industrial production registered a notable year-on-year growth in October.
In seasonally and calendar- adjusted terms, October production figure was flat compared to the previous month, but 1.0 percent higher than the third-quarter average.
Among indicators of November, the manufacture of vehicles and electricity generation receded.
The Business Tendency Survey data and the PMI indicators for the last three months point to an increase in production due to waning domestic uncertainties.
Accordingly, industrial production is projected to rise on a quarterly basis in the last quarter of the year.
Data on the expenditure side suggest a more moderate demand growth in the last quarter.
Following a slight decline in the third quarter, sales of automobiles remained below the previous quarter’s average in the October-November period.
Sales of white goods also recorded a decline in the October-November period.
Imports of investment goods receded on a monthly basis.
Indicators of construction investment exhibit a mild pattern, while future investment expectations of firms point to a recovery in the October-November period.
In sum, domestic demand is likely to provide a modest contribution to growth in the last quarter.
Recent rebound in confidence indicators ease the downside risks to economic activity.
Business survey data indicate that export orders over the last three months recorded an improvement in the October-November period, while domestic orders, which remained moderate in the first three quarters, assumed a recovery trend recently.
Moreover, the consumer confidence has increased notably.
Likewise, investment and employment prospects improved in the October-November period.
Against this background, confidence channel is expected to boost domestic demand in the upcoming period.
Current account balance continues to improve.
Although geopolitical tensions still weigh on export growth, the robust increasing trend in exports to Europe provides support to growth and rebalancing.
Current account balance is expected to further improve in the upcoming period, owing to the lagged effects of the fall in oil prices and the slowdown in credit growth.
In September 2015, non-farm unemployment rate recorded a limited decline upon the increase in employment.
Labor force in non-farm sectors trended upwards in this period.
Among sectors, industrial employment claimed the highest rate of increase in September following a decline of three quarters in a row.
Employment in the construction sector edged up, while that in the services sector followed a robust course.
Going ahead, industrial production and survey indicators signal a mild increase in employment.
Given the economic outlook, the current trends in services and construction employment is expected to be maintained.
Overall, non-farm unemployment may recede in the last quarter of the year.
To sum up, recent indicators suggest that domestic demand follows a more moderate course in the last quarter of the year, while external demand offers positive contribution to growth.
Although geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk to external demand, the recovery in the European economies contributes to external demand.
Meanwhile, the recovery in consumer confidence as well as investment and employment prospects amid waning domestic uncertainties is likely to support domestic demand in the upcoming period.
Hence, economic activity is expected to maintain a stable growth trend.
Although loan growth has recently displayed a downward trend, the recovery in financial conditions and higher revenues due to wage hikes are expected to support loan growth in the upcoming period.
Commercial loans continue to grow at a faster pace than consumer loans.
Such a composition not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the improvement in the current account balance.
In the third quarter of the year, growth composition turned in favor of net exports on a quarterly basis.
Following a robust trend in the first half, domestic demand displayed a milder course in the second half of the year, as projected.
Although the geopolitical tension resides as a downward risk to external demand, this risk is contained by the flexibility of our exports in shifting markets.
In fact, Turkish exports towards the European Union countries recently gained considerable momentum.
Moreover, favorable developments in the terms of trade and the deceleration in consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Therefore, the annual current account deficit is expected to narrow further in the upcoming period.
The Committee stated that the desired improvement in the inflation outlook is yet to be seen.
Although energy price developments continue to affect inflation favorably, cumulative exchange rate movements delay the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Exchange rates followed a relatively stable course during the final quarter of the year amid easing domestic uncertainties and the significant improvement in the current account balance.
However, the lagged pass-through from the cumulative depreciation in the first three quarters continued to have an adverse impact on inflation.
Accordingly, core inflation indicators are expected to remain at high levels in the short run.
In addition, year-end unprocessed food inflation is likely to exceed the October Inflation Report projections.
The effect of higher-than-targeted inflation on expectations and the acceleration in wage increases necessitate close monitoring of the overall pricing behavior.
Against this backdrop, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance would be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
Future monetary policy decisions will be conditional on the factors affecting the inflation outlook.
The Committee stated that the wide interest rate corridor has contributed to containing exchange rate volatility in times of heightened global volatility.
The need for such an instrument would be reduced, should the decline in volatility observed after the start of the global policy normalization prove persistent.
Another factor reducing the need for a wide interest rate corridor is the effective use of policy instruments laid out in the roadmap published in August.
Excessive fluctuations both in exchange rates and loans have waned owing to the launch and effective use of these instruments.
In this respect, the Committee highlighted the significance of the measures to stabilize the foreign exchange liquidity during the simplification process.
To this end, it was indicated that the automatic stabilizer feature of the ROM will be strengthened before the monetary policy simplification, as elaborated in the Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2016.
Moreover, it was reiterated that conditions and limits regarding the pledge of foreign currency deposits as collateral against Turkish lira operations might be revised before and during simplification.
Against this background, monetary policy simplification steps would begin with the next meeting, should the decline in volatility prove persistent.
The interest rate corridor is aimed to be narrower and more symmetrical around the one-week repo rate.
The nature and the pace of simplification steps will depend on the factors affecting the volatility in global and domestic markets.
Given the current environment of highly uncertain global markets, maintaining and further advancing these achievements is significant.
In December, consumer prices edged up by 0.21 percent, and annual inflation rose by 0.71 points to 8.81 percent.
This rise in inflation is attributed to the increase in unprocessed food prices and the base effect in energy prices.
Core goods inflation continued to rise, and services inflation maintained its high level.
Thus, annual inflation of core indicators recorded an increase, while its underlying trend improved slightly.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.35 points to 10.87 percent.
This was driven by the rising prices of vegetables, and the annual rate of price increases reached 23.32 percent in this sub-group.
Thus, unprocessed food inflation climbed to 13.83 percent, maintaining its high course of the last two years.
On the processed food front, annual inflation increased to 8.33 percent due particularly to the price developments in oils and bread-cereals groups.
Leading indicators for January suggest a persisting high course in food inflation.
On the energy front, despite a monthly decline by 0.22 percent in prices, annual inflation climbed to 2.96 percent due to the base effect in December.
In January, the fall in oil prices notwithstanding, energy inflation is expected to increase further owing both to the low base in 2015 and the adjustment in electricity prices.
In addition to the adjustment in electricity prices, adjustments introduced to some items with administered prices like tobacco and alcoholic drinks in early January will have a direct effect on inflation close to 0.7 point.
Prices of services increased by 0.22 percent, and annual services inflation slightly increased to 8.85 percent in the last month of the year.
Thus, prices of services claimed the highest year-end increase since 2008.
Food prices affected services inflation adversely through the catering services channel across the year, leading the restaurants-hotels group to register the highest increase, 13.23 percent, within the sub-groups.
Meanwhile, the cumulative depreciation in the exchange rate coupled with the course of the headline inflation and the effects of wage developments stood out as other factors for the high course of services inflation.
On the other hand, slowing oil prices curbed services inflation through transport services.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.61 points to 10.22 percent in December.
Annual inflation followed a flat course in durable goods, but recorded increases in other sub-groups.
The cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira continued to affect core goods, albeit with some slowdown.
Clothing inflation remained on the rise, and annual inflation in this group rose by around 4.7 points to 9 percent in the last three- month-period.
Seasonally-adjusted data indicated a decrease in the underlying trend of core goods inflation in December.
In sum, international energy prices continue to affect inflation favorably.
On the other hand, other cost factors limit the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Industrial production recorded a month-on-month decline in November, yet the October-November average of the index stood above the third-quarter level.
Among the BTS order indicators of the last three months, the domestic market orders registered a recovery, while the export orders declined.
The Headline PMI and PMI production indices recorded an increase in December, following the increase in November, and remained above the stationary level.
Despite the decline in December, consumer confidence indices stood above the level in October.
The investor confidence also increased moderately in December.
Against this background, industrial production is expected to register an increase on a monthly basis in December.
Data on the expenditure side suggest a milder course of private demand growth in the last quarter of 2015 relative to the third quarter.
In the October-November period, production and imports of consumption goods registered a decline compared to the average of the previous quarter.
Sales of white goods and automobiles trended downwards as well.
Among indicators of investment, production of capital goods increased further in the October-November period, yet the imports receded.
Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products and sales of heavy commercial vehicles, which are among the indicators for construction investment, registered a decline.
Favorable developments in the terms of trade accompanied by the moderate course of consumer loans support the recovery in the current account balance.
Demand from the European Union economies continues to support exports, despite elevated geopolitical risks in other export markets.
The trend of recovery in the European economy, which is a significant trading partner of Turkey, continued in the last quarter of 2015.
In addition to the recovery trend in the Euro area, high market- shifting flexibility supports exports.
Accordingly, improvement in the current account balance is expected to continue with the support of increased demand from the EU countries, low course of commodity prices, and ongoing macroprudential policy measures.
In October 2015, unemployment rates registered a month-on-month increase.
Labor force in non-farm sectors grew more than employment in this period.
Industrial employment increased, while construction employment remained unchanged.
Services employment, on the other hand, displayed a slight decline.
Industrial production and survey indicators signal an increase in employment in the upcoming period.
Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products hints at no additional revival in the construction sector.
In the services sector, employment data in sub-sectors follow a fluctuating course.
Accordingly, unemployment rates in the last quarter are expected to remain close to those of the third quarter.
To sum up, recent indicators suggest that growth in economic activity will continue in the last quarter of 2015, albeit at a slower pace.
Despite the downside risk due to geopolitical developments, the recovery in the European economies continues to positively contribute to external demand.
In the upcoming period, domestic demand is likely to be supported by the income channel through wage increases and the low course of oil prices, and by the confidence channel through waning domestic uncertainties.
Hence, growth in economic activity is expected to continue.
Committee (the Committee) discussed the medium-term projections to be published in the January Inflation Report.
Inflation in the last quarter of 2015 exceeded the projections of the October Inflation Report mainly due to unprocessed food prices.
However, inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco was close to the October forecast in this period.
Core inflation remained high due to the lagged effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira, yet the ongoing fall in import prices in the fourth quarter limited the rise in CPI inflation.
Evaluating assumptions underlying the inflation forecasts and the course of exogenous variables, an upward revision was made to the end-2016 inflation forecast, in consideration of the effects of the revisions in the Turkish lira- denominated import and oil prices, administered price adjustments announced in January and minimum wage arrangements.
Energy price developments continue to affect inflation favorably, while other cost factors limit the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Food prices remain volatile due mainly to the unprocessed food group.
Lagged effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira are evident particularly on the core goods inflation.
Moreover, as the minimum-wage adjustment passes through to overall wages, cost and demand pressures on inflation stemming from wages are likely to increase in the upcoming period.
Accordingly, core inflation indicators are expected to remain high for a while.
The effect of the above-target inflation on expectations and the acceleration in wage increases require the pricing behavior regarding the overall economy to be monitored closely.
In this respect, considering the impact of wage developments and the uncertainties in global markets on inflation expectations and pricing behavior, and taking into account the volatility in energy and unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
Taking into account inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and the course of other factors affecting inflation, the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained.
The recent growth trend of loans reveals that both consumer and commercial loans remained below historical averages; consumer loans throughout 2015, commercial loans only in the second half of the year.
Recent arrangements in risk weights and minimum wages are considered to boost loan growth through the loan supply and household income channels.
On the other hand, the ongoing tightness in financial conditions is likely to keep the annual loan growth rates at reasonable levels.
In the upcoming period, it is envisaged that the domestic demand will provide a slightly larger contribution to growth and the rising demand from the European Union countries will continue to improve exports.
The recovery in the investor and consumer confidence led by waning domestic uncertainties, the room for spending amid the fall in oil prices and the effects of the recent wage developments on the purchasing power are projected to boost domestic demand.
Persisting global volatilities and the tightness in financial conditions stand out as the factors that limit the domestic demand increase.
On the foreign demand front, geopolitical developments pose a downside risk, yet the trend of rebound in the European economy coupled with the market-shifting flexibility of our exports cap this risk.
In fact, exports towards the European Union countries have recently recorded a remarkable acceleration.
Moreover, improvements in the terms of trade mainly led by the sharp fall in commodity prices, accompanied by the sluggish course of consumer loans support the improvement in the current account balance.
Accordingly, the current account deficit is expected to decline further in the upcoming period.
Exchange rates also display a quite fluctuating course.
The Committee believes that the policy tools placed in the road map announced in August 2015 strengthen the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
In the upcoming period, both global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and required measures will continue to be taken.
In this context, related departments presented information to the Committee on the foreign exchange liquidity instruments and methods that have been used since 18 August 2015 and that may be used in the upcoming periods and their effects.
In case the decline in loan growth rates becomes permanent and exchange rates continue to face upward pressure, the Committee, while preserving the tight monetary policy stance, may take measures to support the Turkish lira and loan growth by reconsidering the funding conditions for the use of foreign currency denominated collateral.
In this respect, the Committee stated that the policy stance will remain tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity and supportive of the financial stability.
The need for such an instrument would be reduced, should the decline in global volatility prove persistent.
Another factor reducing the need for a wide interest rate corridor is the effective use of policy instruments laid out in the road map published in August.
The Committee’s assessment still prevails that the monetary policy may be implemented within a narrower and more standard interest rate corridor, should global volatilities see a permanent decline or the policy tools specified in the August road map permanently cap the effects of the global volatility on the Turkish economy.
In January, consumer prices edged up by 1.82 percent, and annual inflation rose by 0.77 points to 9.58 percent.
This rise in inflation is attributed to the products with administered prices and unprocessed food prices.
The total effect of adjustments in certain products with administered prices in early January amounted to 0.7 points, as projected.
Accordingly, annual inflation of core indicators recorded an increase, while their underlying trend improved slightly.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.82 points to 11.69 percent.
This was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices that increased due to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Annual inflation reached 20.09 percent in this sub-group, while that in unprocessed food hit 15.33 percent.
On the processed food front, annual inflation increased to 8.41 percent amid the price developments in bread-cereals group in the last two months.
Leading indicators for February suggest a downtrend in food inflation.
On the energy front, prices rose by 0.81 percent due to electricity prices, and annual inflation climbed to 4.61 percent.
Annual energy inflation is envisaged to fall due to developments in oil prices coupled with the base effect in February.
Prices of services increased by 1.34 percent, and annual services inflation increased to 9.16 percent in January.
Prices of services recorded the fastest monthly increase of the last ten years, and high increases spread across sub-groups.
The gradually slowing price increases in the restaurants-hotels group amid the moderate course of meat prices in the last quarter of 2015 re-accelerated in January.
In addition to wage developments and the high course of food inflation, accumulated exchange-rate pass through effects delay the fall in services inflation.
Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.12 points to 10.10 percent in January.
Annual inflation decreased in durable goods, but maintained its uptrend in other sub-groups.
Effects of the exchange rate continued with a dwindling pace in prices of core goods excluding clothing and durable goods, while the decline in clothing prices remained below seasonal averages.
On the other hand, seasonally-adjusted indicators suggest an improvement in the underlying trend of core goods inflation in January.
In sum, energy prices continue to affect inflation favorably, while other cost factors limit the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Industrial production recorded an increase in December compared to previous month.
Quarterly production in the fourth quarter materialized above the third quarter.
The headline PMI and the PMI production indices fell in January, despite staying above neutral levels.
Business Tendency Survey data suggest that domestic orders registered an increase from the previous quarter’s average, while export orders were relatively weaker.
Given these indicators as well as data on exports and imports, the pace of industrial production growth is expected to decelerate somewhat in January.
Data on the expenditure side suggest a milder course of private demand growth in the final quarter of 2015 relative to the third quarter.
In this period, the production and imports of consumer goods were down from the previous quarter’s average.
Among indicators of investment, the production of capital goods posted a modest fourth-quarter growth, whereas the imports receded.
The production of non- metallic minerals and sales of heavy commercial vehicles, which are indicators for construction investments, registered an increase.
Among indicators for the first quarter of 2016, auto sales remained subdued in January, while home appliance sales were up.
Consumer confidence indices declined in January and February yet remained above the October level.
Meanwhile, data on the investment tendency hint at a moderate growth.
Against this background, private demand is expected to rise modestly in the first quarter of 2016.
Despite heightened geopolitical risks, the growing EU demand continues to support exports.
The recovery in Europe, one of Turkey’s major export markets, continued into January.
Additionally, Turkey’s high market-shifting flexibility also supports exports.
Thus, amid a continued EU demand growth, low commodity prices and ongoing macroprudential policies, the current account balance is likely to improve further in 2016, which, however, might be restrained by the likely fall in tourism revenues due to geopolitical developments.
Unemployment rates were down month-on-month in November 2015.
In this period, employment grew at a faster pace than labor force in nonfarm sectors.
Across sub-sectors, the services provided the largest contribution to nonfarm employment growth.
Industrial employment decreased marginally, whereas construction employment picked up.
Industrial production and survey indicators signal no additional rebound for industrial employment over the upcoming period.
The course of nonmetallic mineral production indicates a moderate growth in construction employment.
Employment data for sub-sectors of services remain volatile.
Leading indicators for the labor market suggest that unemployment rates will remain flat over the coming months.
In conclusion, recent indicators suggest that the economy continues to grow at a moderate pace.
In the upcoming period, domestic demand is likely to be supported by the income channel through wage increases and low oil prices.
Although geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk, demand from the European Union economies continues to support exports at an increasing pace.
Although energy price developments continue to affect inflation favorably, other cost factors limit the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Meanwhile, food prices remain volatile largely due to unprocessed food prices.
Leading indicators point to a likely downward correction in unprocessed food prices in the short term.
Moreover, the waning of the lagged pass-through effects of cumulative exchange rate movements might contribute to disinflation in coming months.
Against this backdrop, the Committee expects the disinflation to resume by February.
Yet, developments in both wages and inflation expectations pose an upside risk to the core inflation outlook.
Thus, core inflation indicators are likely to remain elevated for some time.
The adverse impact of the above-target inflation on inflation expectations and the acceleration in wage increases necessitates a close monitoring of the overall pricing behavior.
Therefore, the current tight monetary stance should be maintained in order for the impending disinflation to be permanent.
Against this backdrop, considering the impact of wage developments and the uncertainties in global markets on inflation expectations and the pricing behavior, and taking into account the volatility in energy and unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
Recent data point to no major change in the underlying trend of loans.
Adjustments in risk weights and minimum wages are considered to support loan growth through the loan supply and household income channels.
Yet, the ongoing financial tightening is likely to keep annual loan 3 growth rates at reasonable levels.
Leading data indicate that domestic demand has slowed somewhat as of mid-2015 but continues to contribute to growth modestly.
The financial tightening due to persisting global volatility dampens domestic demand growth, whereas energy prices and wage developments bolster domestic demand through the income channel.
On the foreign demand front, geopolitical developments pose a downside risk, yet the European economic recovery and the market-shifting flexibility of Turkish exports offset this risk.
In fact, the favorable effect of the growing EU demand on exports has become more significant recently.
Moreover, improvements in the terms of trade mainly led by the cumulative fall in commodity prices, coupled with the modest course of consumer loans, support the improvement in the current account balance.
Overall, economic activity is expected to remain on a moderate growth path while the current account deficit is expected to narrow further in the upcoming period.
The Committee assesses that the effective use of the policy tools announced in the road map of August 2015 strengthen the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
This process is supported by a gradual reduction in demand for foreign exchange due to improved current account balance and lower energy prices.
Meanwhile, foreign currency liquidity instruments are used to stabilize the value of the Turkish lira.
In this context, foreign currency liquidity is provided through flexible foreign exchange sales auctions at amounts deemed necessary.
Nevertheless, uncertainties surrounding global monetary policies and concerns over global growth cause global markets to remain volatile.
Emerging-market portfolio inflows and risk premiums follow a fluctuating pattern, while exchange rate volatilities remain elevated.
In the forthcoming period, both global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and required measures in foreign exchange and Turkish lira markets will continue to be taken.
In the case of sustained volatility, additional measures might be taken to support the Turkish lira by adjusting the funding conditions for the use of foreign currency denominated collateral, while maintaining the tight monetary policy stance.
The Committee stated that the wide interest rate corridor has contributed markedly to containing exchange rate volatility in times of heightened global volatility.
Another factor that may reduce the need for a wide interest rate 4 corridor is the effective use of the policy instruments laid out in the road map published in August.
Excessive fluctuations in both exchange rates and loans have waned owing to the launch and effective use of these instruments.
The Committee still maintains the view that the monetary policy may be implemented within a narrower and more standard interest rate corridor, should global volatilities post a permanent decline or the policy tools of the August road map permanently contain the effects of the global volatility on the Turkish economy.
In February, consumer prices edged down by 0.02 percent, and annual inflation dropped by 0.80 points to 8.78 percent.
The fall in inflation stemmed from unprocessed food and energy prices.
Lagged effects of the exchange rate weakened further in this period.
Annual inflation in core indicators recorded a slight increase, while the underlying trend continued to improve to a limited extent.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group fell by 2.86 points to 8.83 percent.
This was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which decreased to 8.89 percent due to vegetable prices.
On the processed food front, annual inflation sustained the uptrend amid the price developments in the bread-cereals group and hit 8.79 percent.
Meanwhile, leading indicators suggest a notable decline in food inflation in March as well.
On the energy front, prices fell by 0.56 percent due mainly to fuel prices, and annual inflation decreased to 2.85 percent.
Annual energy inflation is envisaged to fall further due to the base effect in March.
Prices of services increased by 0.59 percent, and annual services inflation receded to 9.06 percent in February.
Annual inflation decreased in the communication and restaurants-hotels groups, but increased in other subgroups.
Annual inflation in the rent group hit the highest level of the last six years.
The high course of inflation expectations and wage developments as well as lagged exchange rate pass-through effects delay the fall in services inflation.
Annual core goods inflation edged up by 0.27 points to 10.37 percent in February.
Annual inflation registered an increase across all subgroups.
Annual inflation of durable consumption goods maintained high levels with 12 percent, and that of the clothing group hit 9.80 percent.
Upward trend in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods continued.
On the other hand, seasonally-adjusted indicators suggest a slowdown in the underlying trend of core goods inflation due to the dwindling effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira.
In sum, food and energy prices have affected inflation favorably, while other cost factors have limited the improvement in the core inflation trend recently.
January industrial production increased by 1 percent month-on-month in seasonally adjusted terms, which was 1.3 percent above the previous quarter.
Thus, the growth trend of 2015 was preserved in January.
Survey indicators and external trade data suggest a similar pace of growth in February.
Data on the expenditure side suggest a modest course of private demand growth in the first quarter of 2016.
The production of consumer goods was higher than the previous quarter's average in January.
In addition, the sales of home appliances and automobiles picked up in February after a sluggish January.
The uptrend across these industries is likely to continue into March.
Survey-based indices for domestic orders also point to a continued moderate rise in domestic demand.
Among indicators of investment, the production and imports of capital goods posted a small decline in January; yet the decline was mostly attributed to the vehicle industry and expected to be short-lived.
The production of non-metallic minerals and the sales of heavy commercial vehicles, which are indicators for construction investments, registered a drop caused partly by adverse weather conditions.
Meanwhile, the consumer confidence indices and the investment sentiment reveal that the contribution of the confidence channel to domestic demand is still limited.
The growing EU demand continues to support exports.
Turkish exporters’ flexibility in shifting between markets contains the downside risks resulting from geopolitical tensions.
Thus, amid an ongoing EU demand growth, low commodity prices and sustained macroprudential policies, the current account balance is likely to improve further.
Unemployment rates were down month-on-month in December 2015, largely due to growing nonfarm employment and lower labor force participation.
Across sub- sectors, the services provided the largest contribution to nonfarm employment growth, while construction employment also increased.
Industrial employment, on the other hand, edged down for the second month in a row in December.
Production and survey indicators suggest that employment growth will maintain its moderate course in the short term.
Accordingly, unemployment rates are expected to remain flat in the first quarter of 2016.
In conclusion, recent indicators reveal that the economy continues to grow steadily as of the first quarter of 2016.
Although geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk, the EU recovery affects external demand favorably.
Wage increases and low oil prices support domestic demand through the income channel.
Overall, economic activity remains on a moderate growth path.
The modest course of loans can be attributed to both supply and demand side factors.
Adjustments in risk weights and minimum wages are considered to support loan growth in the forthcoming period through the loan supply and household income channels.
Yet, indicators for the loan market still point to tight financial conditions, notwithstanding the recent fall in market rates and risk premiums.
Therefore, loan growth rates are unlikely to post a significant recovery in the short run.
Recent data indicate that domestic demand continues to contribute to growth modestly albeit at a lesser extent compared to previous quarters.
Ongoing tightness in financial conditions weighs on loan and domestic demand growth, whereas energy prices and wage developments provide support to domestic demand through the income channel.
On the foreign demand front, geopolitical developments pose a downside risk, yet the economic recovery in Europe and the flexibility of exporters in shifting between markets offset this risk, which is conducive for both economic growth and rebalancing prospects.
On the other hand, the Committee noted that the recent developments in services exports pose downside risks on demand, employment, and the current account balance.
Although this risk is not imminent at the moment, the developments should be monitored closely to have a clearer understanding of the implications for the medium-term outlook.
Overall, the monetary policy stance is based on an outlook where economic activity will remain on a moderate growth path while the current account deficit will narrow further, albeit at a slower pace.
The Committee assesses that the effective use of the policy tools announced in the road map of August 2015 bolster the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
Excessive volatility in both credit and exchange rates has been dampened after the adoption of these new instruments.
In fact, the relative volatility of the Turkish lira has decreased notably since September compared to other emerging market currencies.
This process is supported by the gradually falling demand for foreign exchange amid the improving current account balance and lower energy prices.
All these developments reduce the need for a wide interest rate corridor to some degree.
Another factor that has recently reduced the need for a wide interest rate corridor is the global economic and financial developments.
Mounting prospects that global economic recovery will be slow have recently fostered the expectations of a prolonged period of low interest rates across advanced economies.
Accordingly, capital flows into emerging economies increased while risk premiums fell significantly.
In sum, global volatility has recently waned to some extent and the effective use of the policy instruments laid out in the road map of August 2015 have reduced the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
In this respect, the Committee decided to take a measured step towards simplification by lowering the overnight lending rate by 25 basis points.
However, improvement in the underlying core inflation trend remains limited, necessitating the maintenance of a tight liquidity stance.
Although recent developments regarding imported input costs have eased the upside risks on the inflation outlook, the improvement in core inflation is still limited.
Wage developments and the lagged pass-through effects of cumulative exchange rate movements restrain the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation.
Annual inflation in food prices, which declined significantly in February, is likely to post another sharp fall in March.
Yet, this will be mainly due to prices of vegetables, suggesting that food prices might remain volatile in the upcoming period.
Against this background, the Committee stated that the current tight liquidity stance should be maintained in order to ensure that the recently observed disinflation process is long lasting.
Moreover, global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and necessary measures will be undertaken in the foreign exchange and Turkish lira markets.
In sum, the policy stance will remain tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity and supportive of the financial stability.
Any measure that would ensure the sustainability of fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In March, consumer prices edged down by 0.04 percent, and annual inflation dropped by 1.32 points to 7.46 percent.
As also stated in the Summary of the March MPC Meeting, this fall in inflation stemmed from unprocessed food prices.
In this period, annual inflation in core indicators recorded a slight fall, while the underlying trend continued to improve on the back of the core goods group.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group fell by 4.25 points to 4.58 percent.
This was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which plunged to 0.22 percent due to prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the processed food front, annual inflation sustained the uptrend due to the price developments in the bread-cereals group but with a diminishing pace.
Meanwhile, leading indicators hint at a notable decline in unprocessed food annual inflation in April as well.
On the energy front, prices rose by 0.60 percent due mainly to international oil prices, while annual inflation decreased to 1.83 percent due to the base effect.
Prices of services increased by 0.38 percent, and the annual services inflation receded by 0.20 point to 8.86 percent in March.
Annual inflation decreased in the other services and restaurants-hotels groups, but increased in remaining subgroups.
The underlying trend of services prices remained at high levels, which is attributed to high levels of inflation expectations and the pricing behavior as well as increased costs amid wage developments and cumulative exchange rate effects.
Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.24 points to 10.13 percent in March.
Having increased since September, the annual clothing inflation recorded a decline in this period.
Owing to the decelerating cumulative exchange rate effects, core goods excluding clothing saw a further decline in annual inflation, albeit limited.
In addition, the recent stable course of the Turkish lira led to an improvement in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
In sum, inflation has recently recorded a notable decline.
Driven mainly by the unprocessed food group, this decline is expected to continue in the short term.
Despite the fall in inflation, the Committee stated that the improvement in core inflation was limited.
According to the TurkStat, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by a quarterly 0.7 percent and a yearly 5.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Thus, the economy grew by 4.0 percent in 2015.
On the production side, the industrial value-added made the greatest contribution to quarterly growth in the last quarter.
Finance and insurance activities accounted for most of the services value-added over the year.
Meanwhile, the noticeable agricultural value-added growth and rise in net taxes upon the increasing production of petroleum products made a significant contribution to growth throughout the year.
On the expenditure side, investment spending was the main driver of final domestic demand in quarterly terms.
In this period, consumer spending slowed and external demand declined.
In sum, 2015 was marked as a year with faster private consumption growth than the GDP growth, recovering capital accumulation and contracted external demand.
Data for the first quarter of 2016 suggest that economic activity remains on the rise.
Industrial production increased by 1.6 percent during January-February period relative to the previous quarter’s average.
Given the external trade outlook and survey data for March, industrial production is expected to expand further in the first quarter.
Data on spending side point to a moderate domestic demand in the first quarter.
Among indicators of private consumption, the production and imports of consumer goods rose in the January-February period.
Likewise, sales of automobiles, home appliances, and homes were up.
On the investment side, the production of capital goods dropped whereas their imports increased.
Yet, the production of nonmetallic minerals expanded while their imports receded.
Sales of commercial vehicles were also down in the first quarter.
Accordingly, it is assessed that private consumer spending was more robust than investments, and private consumption was the main driver of domestic demand in the first quarter.
The growing EU demand and Turkey’s high market-shifting flexibility limit downside risks caused by geopolitical developments.
Thus, amid continued EU demand growth, low commodity prices, and ongoing macroprudential policies, the current account balance is expected to improve further.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down on a month-on-month basis in January 2016, due to the increase in nonfarm employment and decline in labor supply.
Across sub-sectors, services provided the largest contribution to nonfarm employment growth, while construction employment also increased.
Industrial employment, on the other hand, was slightly down in January for the second month in a row.
In view of production and survey indicators, employment is expected to remain on a modest track in the short term.
To sum up, current indicators suggest that the economy continues to grow at a steady and moderate pace.
Although geopolitical developments pose a downside risk, the growing EU demand continues to stimulate exports.
The Committee discussed the medium-term projections to be published in the April Inflation Report.
In the first quarter of 2016, inflation remained below the projections of the January Inflation Report mainly due to unprocessed food prices.
However, inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco was close to the January forecast in this period.
Considering the assumptions underlying the forecasts and the course of exogenous variables, inflation forecasts for the upcoming period were left unchanged from the previous report.
After the January Inflation Report, the Turkish lira remained stable while oil prices inched up and import prices edged down slightly.
Accordingly, the impact of TL import prices was not significant enough to lead to any change in the inflation forecasts.
Despite the recently slumping unprocessed food inflation, assumptions for food inflation are preserved given high volatility in food prices.
After slowing down in the fourth quarter of 2015, particularly for consumer loans, the growth trend of loans picked up in the first quarter of 2016.
Risk weight and minimum wage arrangements and improving financial conditions are likely to boost loan growth in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
Thus, annual loan growth rates are expected to remain at reasonable levels.
This composition not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also supports the improvement in the current account balance.
Recent data and the leading indicators show that economic activity displays a moderate and stable course of growth.
In the forthcoming period, domestic demand is likely to contribute more strongly to growth while the growing EU demand will further stimulate exports in spite of geopolitical risks.
Strengthened investor and consumer confidence driven by reduced domestic uncertainties, recently improved financial conditions, robust post-global-crisis employment performance, and the early 2016 minimum wage hike are all expected to support domestic demand.
On the foreign demand front, geopolitical developments and weaker global growth continue to pose downside risks, with those to exports of services recently being on the rise.
Nevertheless, the economic recovery in Europe and the market-shifting flexibility of our exports cap these downside risks.
In fact, the rising EU demand has had a favorable effect on exports recently, which is conducive for both economic growth and rebalancing prospects.
Against this background, the monetary policy stance is based on an outlook, where economic activity will remain on a moderate growth path while the current account deficit will narrow further, albeit at a slower pace.
The Committee assesses that the effective use of the policy tools announced in the road map of August 2015 bolsters the resilience of the economy against global shocks.
The introduction of these new instruments helped to curb the excessive volatility in both exchange rates and credits.
Also, foreign currency liquidity instruments are used to stabilize the value of the Turkish lira.
All these developments alleviate the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
Other factors that have recently reduced the need for a wide interest rate corridor are the continued decline in global volatility and the improving global financial conditions.
Mounting prospects of a slow global economic recovery and the sustained monetary easing by advanced economy central banks have recently fostered the expectations of a prolonged period of low interest rates across advanced economies.
Accordingly, capital flows into emerging economies increased while risk premiums and market interest rates fell significantly.
In sum, the recent lasting decline in global volatility and the effective use of the policy instruments laid out in the road map announced in August 2015 have reduced the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
Thus, the Committee decided to take a measured step towards simplification by lowering the marginal funding rate.
On the other hand, the improvement in the underlying core inflation trend remains limited, necessitating the maintenance of the tight liquidity policy stance.
Although recent developments regarding imported input costs have eased the upside risks to the inflation outlook, the improvement in core inflation is still limited.
The lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements, high levels of inflation expectations and wage developments restrain the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation.
Food inflation has recently seen a marked decline on the back of unprocessed food prices.
The falling food inflation led to a decrease in consumer inflation as well, which is expected to continue in the short run.
Yet, given the high volatility in unprocessed food prices, it is important to remain cautious about the inflation outlook.
Hence, the Committee stated that the current tight liquidity stance should be maintained in order to ensure that the recently observed disinflation becomes permanent.
In the upcoming period, monetary policy stance will be conditional on the inflation outlook.
Moreover, global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and necessary measures will be taken for the foreign exchange and Turkish lira markets.
Notwithstanding the significant external shocks in recent years, the current policy framework limited the worsening in inflation and inflation expectations.
However, price stability is yet to be achieved.
Ten years of experience with inflation targeting has shown that the fight against inflation requires collaboration from all relevant parties.
Therefore, bringing inflation permanently down to the 5-percent target requires all institutions to continue resolutely with the efforts made in recent years.
In April, consumer prices rose by 0.78 percent, and annual inflation dropped by 0.89 points to 6.57 percent.
Consumer inflation declined further on the back of unprocessed food prices.
In this period, annual inflation in core indicators remained high, while their underlying trend continued to improve.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group fell by 3.20 points to 1.38 percent.
The deceleration in food inflation was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which plunged to -5.94 percent.
In this group, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables remained below the previous year’s levels due to increased supply of products, whereas red meat prices exhibit a mild outlook amid the measures in effect.
On the other hand, processed food inflation sustained its high course also due to prices in the bread-cereals group.
On the energy front, prices rose by 0.34 percent in line with international oil prices, while annual inflation sustained the mild outlook with 1.74 percent.
Prices of services increased by 0.64 percent, and the annual services inflation edged down by 0.10 point to 8.76 percent in April.
Being the culprit of high figures in services inflation, the restaurants-hotels and other services groups lost pace in the last couple of months.
The mild course in food prices reflected favorably on prices in the restaurants-hotels group, and the attenuated cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira underpins the slowdown in inflation in other services.
On the other hand, inflation in transport services continued with an uptrend and rent inflation rose to 8.39 percent.
All in all, despite some deceleration, the underlying trend of services prices remained high.
Annual core goods inflation remained flat with 10.11 percent in April.
Annual inflation recorded an increase in the clothing group, but edged down in others.
Prices of durable goods registered a modest monthly increase by 0.43 percent, yet the uptrend in subgroups like furniture and white goods proved notable.
The underlying trend of core goods weakened further, and when clothing is excluded, the improvement is more remarkable.
Amid the decelerating cumulative exchange rate effects, annual core goods inflation is projected to slow in the second half of the year.
In sum, inflation has recently recorded a notable decline driven mainly by the unprocessed food prices.
Despite the fall in inflation, the Committee stated that the improvement in the underlying core inflation trend remains limited.
Up by 1.5 percent from the previous quarter’s average, industrial production recorded the largest increase since the first quarter of 2014.
Production of basic pharmaceuticals made the greatest contribution to quarterly growth, while main industries such as food, clothing and textiles also contributed to growth, which is a favorable development.
In addition, the steady increase in the exports to the EU is another factor supporting industrial production growth.
Data on spending side point to a rising domestic demand for the first quarter.
Among indicators of private consumption, the production and imports of consumer goods grew robustly.
Likewise, sales of automobiles, home appliances and homes were up in the first quarter.
The production of capital goods declined due to vehicle manufacturing, yet vehicles excluded, it posted a rise.
Moreover, both the warmer-than-normal weather in winter months and the upsurge in the production and imports of nonmetallic minerals suggest some increase in construction activities for the first quarter.
Against this background, it is assessed that private consumer spending was more robust than investments, and private consumption was the main driver of domestic demand in the first quarter.
High market-shifting flexibility of exports limits downside risks caused by geopolitical developments.
Thus, amid continued EU demand growth, low commodity prices and ongoing macroprudential policies, the current account balance is expected to improve further.
Yet, the falling number of foreign visitors weighs on revenues from services, posing a downside risk to the current account deficit.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down month-on-month in February 2016, due to the weakening labor supply and the moderate gain in nonfarm employment.
Across sub-sectors, services provided the largest contribution to nonfarm employment growth, while construction employment continued to expand.
Meanwhile, industrial employment continued to drop slightly in February.
This labor market outlook is likely to spur growth in 2016.
In sum, current indicators suggest that the economy continues to grow at a moderate and steady pace.
In the upcoming period, the income channel is likely to push domestic demand higher through wage increases and a food price-driven decline in headline inflation.
Although geopolitical developments continue to pose downside risks, the growing EU demand continues to support exports, and thus production.
Risk weight and minimum wage arrangements are expected to boost loan growth further in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
Thus, annual loan growth rates are likely to remain at reasonable levels.
Economic activity remains on a moderate and steady growth track.
In the first quarter, industrial production recorded a robust quarter-on-quarter increase while external demand supported growth.
In the forthcoming period, domestic demand is expected to provide further support to growth while the rising EU demand will continue to promote exports.
Employment remained on a moderate upward path in the first quarter.
Given wage developments, employment growth is likely to support domestic demand further through the income channel.
On the external demand side, geopolitical tensions and the weakening global growth continued to pose risks, and risks to services exports became prevalent.
However, the European economic recovery and the market-shifting flexibility of exports alleviate the downside risks to external balance.
Moreover, the favorable impact of the cumulative fall in commodity prices on the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Recently, the global volatility has increased to some extent amid ongoing concerns over global growth and continued uncertainty about global monetary policies.
Accordingly, emerging-market portfolio flows slowed slightly while risk premiums and exchange rate volatilities recorded increases.
The Committee assesses that the tight monetary policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policies and the effective use of the policy instruments laid out in the road map published in August 2015 enhance the resilience of the economy against shocks.
These policy measures have tamed the heightened volatility in both exchange rates and loans.
In fact, the Turkish lira has followed a relatively less volatile path than other emerging market currencies since September 2015.
Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to take a measured step towards simplification by lowering the marginal funding rate.
Moreover, within the context of the road map, related departments made presentations about the arrangements that would increase the predictability of liquidity policy and make liquidity management of banks more efficient.
Although low imported-input costs have eased the upside risks to the inflation outlook, the improvement in core inflation is still limited.
The weakening yet ongoing lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements, high levels of inflation expectations and wage developments restrain the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation.
The falling food inflation led to a decrease in consumer inflation as well.
Yet, given the elevated core inflation, it is important to remain cautious about the inflation outlook.
To this end, the Committee stated that the current tight liquidity stance should be maintained in order to ensure that the recently observed disinflation becomes permanent.
In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the inflation outlook.
In sum, the policy stance will remain tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity and supportive of financial stability.
In May, consumer prices rose by 0.58 percent, and annual inflation remained flat with 6.58 percent.
Food inflation increased somewhat due to the base effect, yet maintained its low course and continued to limit consumer inflation.
In this period, annual inflation in core indicators registered a decline, while improvement in the underlying trend proved more evident.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.09 points to 2.47 percent in May.
The low course of food inflation was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which was -4.22 percent.
In this group, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables remained below the previous year’s levels due to increased supply of products, whereas red meat prices exhibited a mild outlook amid the measures in effect.
On the other hand, processed food inflation sustained its high course due to prices of items other than meat and dairy products.
Although leading indicators on June indicate that unprocessed food prices may be subject to a partial correction and the group’s annual inflation may soar, food prices are expected to support the low course in inflation across the year.
On the energy front, prices rose by 1.10 percent in line with the international oil prices and depreciating Turkish lira, while annual inflation sustained the favorable outlook with 1.65 percent.
Prices of services increased by 0.76 percent, and the annual services inflation stood close to the previous month’s level with 8.74 percent in May.
Being the culprit of high figures in services inflation, the deceleration in restaurants-hotels and other services groups in the last couple of months continued in May excluding package tour prices.
The mild course in food prices reflected favorably on prices in the restaurants-hotels group, and the attenuated cumulative effects of the exchange rate underpins the slowdown in inflation in other services.
On the other hand, it is assessed that the surge in unit labor costs in the first quarter is also responsible for the high course in services inflation.
Moreover, it is notable that rents soared in May as they did in April.
All in all, the underlying trend of services prices remained high in May.
Annual core goods inflation decreased by 1.29 points to 8.82 percent in May.
Annual inflation recorded a decline in all sub-groups, and the clothing and durable goods groups stood out.
Prices of durable goods registered a favorable outlook on account of the fall in white goods and flat course of automobile prices in addition to declining furniture prices following an uptrend in the first four months of the year.
The underlying trend of core goods improved further, and when clothing is excluded, the improvement is still remarkable.
Core inflation indicators also recorded favorable figures, yet remained high in May.
Meanwhile, the improvement in the underlying core inflation trend proved more remarkable in this period.
Accordingly, annual inflation in core indicators is projected to fall further in the upcoming period.
However, the high inflation trend in the services group coupled with the unit labor cost developments limit disinflation.
According to TurkStat data for the first quarter of 2016, GDP grew by 4.8 percent year-on-year.
On the production side, industries and services made the greatest contribution to the first quarter’s annual growth.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, GDP increased by 0.8 percent from the previous quarter.
On the spending side, consumption and exports were the main drivers of quarterly growth.
In this period, private consumption accelerated amid wage hikes, employment growth and improving financial conditions.
Exports were buoyed by the strengthening EU recovery.
Nonetheless, with imports gaining remarkably in the first quarter due to increased consumption, net exports contributed negatively to quarterly growth.
In short, growth was driven largely by consumption and supported somewhat by exports in the first quarter, yet capital accumulation remained moderate.
Data for the second quarter of 2016 indicate no additional acceleration for economic activity.
Industrial production dropped by 1.1 percent month-on-month in April on the back of mining, vehicle, furniture and computer industries.
May’s PMI indicators and BTS indicators for orders over the last three months performed slightly better than in April, suggesting some correction in industrial production for May.
Given favorable calendar effects and May’s strike-driven low base effect from automotive manufacturing in last year, industrial production is expected to post a stronger year- on-year increase in May than in April.
Data on the spending front point to a slowing consumer demand and mildly recovering investments for the second quarter.
The production and imports of consumer goods declined in April.
Sales of home appliances fell marginally during April-May, whereas sales of automobiles remained on the rise.
Among indicators for investments, imports of non-vehicle capital goods and machinery-equipment were up from the previous quarter’s average, while their production dropped.
Sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles increased in the April-May period.
The waning uncertainty and improved financial conditions are believed to help investments recover.
Yet, the falling number of foreign visitors weighs on revenues from services, posing a downside risk to the current account balance.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down in March for the second consecutive month.
The strengthening non-farm employment growth pulled unemployment rates down despite the increased labor force participation.
Industrial employment saw a moderate gain, while construction and services employment expanded significantly.
Failing to spread across all sectors, the employment growth in services was driven mostly by public administration and community services.
Yet, the SSI data indicate that the stagnant tourism industry has started to affect employment.
Thus, the unemployment rate continues to face upside risks for the period ahead.
Income channel supports domestic demand through wage increases.
Risk weight arrangements and wage developments are expected to boost loan growth further in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
In the first quarter, GDP expanded on the back of domestic demand.
Consumer spending spurred domestic demand while investments remained weak.
Despite the negative implications of geopolitical developments in external demand, exports to the EU remained on the rise.
Accordingly, exports made a positive contribution to growth in the first quarter.
Domestic demand is expected to continue to support growth in the upcoming period.
Employment remains on a moderate upward path.
On the external demand side, geopolitical tensions and the weakening global growth continued to pose risks, while risks to the tourism industry became prevalent.
However, the robust increase in Turkey’s exports to the EU and the market-shifting flexibility of exports alleviate the downside risks to external balance.
Global financial markets remain volatile amid ongoing concerns over global growth, developments regarding UK's exit from the EU and continued uncertainty about global monetary policies.
Accordingly, emerging-market portfolio flows slowed while risk premiums and exchange rate volatilities recorded increases.
The sharp decline in food inflation since the beginning of the year helped to bring consumer inflation markedly down.
The recent improvement in the core inflation indicators also contributed to this disinflation.
Low imported-input costs and the continued weakening of the lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements support the improvement in the underlying core inflation trend.
On the other hand, the underlying services inflation trend remains elevated.
High levels of inflation expectations and unit labor cost developments restrain the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation.
In June, consumer prices increased by 0.47 percent, and annual inflation went up by 1.06 points to 7.64 percent.
In this period, food inflation posted a notable rise due to the correction in unprocessed food prices and the base effect.
Annual inflation in core indicators registered a decline, while the underlying trends remained virtually unchanged.
As projected in the Summary of the .
Committee Meeting in the previous month, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages climbed to 6.63 percent in June due to unprocessed food prices.
The prices of fresh fruits and vegetables in unprocessed food category increased notably.
Hence, annual inflation in unprocessed food prices increased by around 9 points to 4.62 percent given the low base effect.
On the other hand, processed food inflation posted the lowest monthly rate of increase over the last 3 years and annual inflation in this category declined to 8.38 percent.
Preliminary indicators in July point out that annual food inflation may continue to rise due to unprocessed food prices.
On the energy front, prices increased by 0.50 percent in line with the international oil prices, and annual inflation hit 2.33 percent.
Prices of services increased by 0.42 percent, and the annual services inflation decreased by 0.5 points to 8.25 percent in June.
Prices of restaurants and hotels, which have been decelerating in the last couple of months, continued to slow down in June amid prices of accommodation services.
Waning cumulative effects of the Turkish lira depreciation and the favorable course of other services supported the slowdown in the services inflation.
Accordingly, the underlying trend of services inflation recorded an improvement in June.
On the other hand, rents continued with the high-rated increases of the previous two months and recorded an annual inflation of 8.83 percent.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.31 points to 9.13 percent in June.
Annual inflation posted a rise in durable goods, but remained flat in other subcategories.
Prices of durable goods displayed an unfavorable outlook mainly due to the depreciation of the Turkish lira in May.
Prices in the automotive sector, which enjoys relatively robust sales in the domestic market, displayed an upsurge in June.
Meanwhile, the labor-intensive furniture sector continued to see price increases, albeit at a decelerating pace.
Accordingly, the underlying core goods inflation increased slightly.
Amid the decelerating cumulative exchange rate effects, annual core goods inflation is expected to slow down in the remainder of the year.
In sum, consumer inflation increased in June mainly owing to the unprocessed food prices.
Core inflation indicators continued to decline, albeit at a limited pace.
The price hikes to tobacco products in July will pose upward pressure on consumer inflation.
The Committee highlighted that inflation may register an upsurge in the short term on account of the developments in unprocessed food and tobacco prices.
Meanwhile, core inflation is expected to sustain its gradual downtrend.
Data for the second quarter of 2016 indicate an ongoing yet slowing uptrend in economic activity.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial production index increased by 1.6 percent month-on-month in May; however, the sluggish course in April caused production to see a quarterly fall of 0.4 percent during April-May period.
Current indicators for June suggest that industrial production may follow a more moderate path compared to May.
Survey indicators on output and orders were down in June, while automobile manufacturing recorded a small drop.
Data on the spending side point to a modest course in final domestic demand.
The production of consumer goods remained horizontal during April-May period, whereas the imports thereof declined.
A similar pattern was observed in the production and imports of investment goods.
Meanwhile, sales of automobiles and commercial vehicles remained on the rise in the second quarter.
Firms’ investment demand was relatively weak in the second quarter.
In the April-May period, the non- gold export quantity index was up only slightly from the first quarter, while the non- gold import quantity index posted a fall.
Despite heightened geopolitical risks, exports to the European Union countries continue to grow at an accelerated pace in the recent period.
In this regard, Turkey’s high market-shifting flexibility supports exports.
Yet, the possible spillovers of falling tourism revenues on the current account deficit may be felt more markedly by the summer months.
Meanwhile, commodity prices are also expected to become gradually less supportive of the current account deficit in coming months.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates remained unchanged month-on-month in April.
In this period, non-farm employment continued to grow, while the rising participation rate restricted the decline in unemployment rates.
The upsurge in construction employment was interrupted, while industrial employment recovered back to 2015 levels after falling in the first few months.
Services employment continues to expand, albeit at a slower pace than in March.
The employment growth in services continues to be driven by public administration and community services.
In the light of leading indicators, employment is expected to remain on a modest track in the short term.
Yet, the data by the Social Security Institution indicate that the stagnant tourism sector has started to have spillovers on employment.
To sum up, current indicators suggest that the economy continues to grow at a moderate and steady pace.
The income channel supports domestic demand through wage increases.
Although geopolitical developments pose persisting downside risks, the growing demand from European Union countries continues to have favorable effects on exports, and thus production.
However, the ongoing slump in the tourism sector poses a downside risk to economic activity and the current account balance.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term projections to be published in the July Inflation Report.
In the second quarter of the year, inflation increased in line with the projections of the April Inflation Report mainly due to unprocessed food and energy prices, but went down across core items.
Even though inflation is projected to rise in the short term, core inflation is expected to settle on a milder track across the year.
The recent hikes in unprocessed food prices and the tobacco price adjustments will cause an upsurge in July inflation.
Yet, food prices may see a downward correction in the upcoming periods.
Owing to the measures taken by the Food and Agricultural Product Markets Monitoring Committee (Food Committee) accompanied by the seasonal decline in food demand caused by the tourism sector, the year-end food price inflation is expected to prove lower compared to the previous reporting period.
In addition, owing to the expected deceleration in economic activity in the short term, core inflation is anticipated to exhibit a milder course compared to the previous reporting period across the year.
Meanwhile, the minimum wage hike is estimated to have a limited effect on core inflation on the back of state support.
Given the forecast assumptions and external conditions, inflation forecasts for the upcoming period were left unchanged from the previous Inflation Report.
Financial conditions continue to be tight despite the recent rise in the global risk appetite, which slightly eased conditions.
Financial conditions are likely to remain tight in the short term owing to domestic developments and weaker capital flows.
Accordingly, loan growth rates are not expected to recover notably.
The moderate course of loans is driven not only by demand but also by the supply-side factors.
Recent surveys show that loan standards did not display any easing.
Domestic developments have recently led to fluctuations in markets.
Liquidity measures taken by the Committee have partially limited the volatility in markets.
It is projected that the effects of the fluctuations in markets will prove temporary and Turkey will sustain its resilience through its sound economic fundamentals.
On the other hand, to balance the short-term effects of the tightness in financial conditions, the Committee may make downside adjustments to required reserves, if deemed necessary.
Economic activity maintains a moderate and stable course of growth.
Consumption spending fuels the domestic demand, while investments remain relatively sluggish.
Despite the adverse effects of geopolitical developments on external demand, exports of goods to the European Union countries remain strong.
Restored relations with Russia may support external demand as of the last quarter.
Accordingly, exports are expected to provide further support to growth in the upcoming period.
Meanwhile, the steady increase in employment and wage developments boost domestic demand through the income channel.
In this respect, economic activity is expected to grow moderately across the year.
Recent terrorist attacks and domestic developments pose a downside risk to economic activity especially through the tourism sector.
Thus, the economy may witness a slowdown in the second and third quarters in which tourism revenues register high share within economic activity.
In fact, leading indicators of the second quarter point to a quarter-on-quarter deceleration, which may also continue through the third quarter.
On the other hand, the economy is expected to maintain a steady course of growth amid structural arrangements and investment incentives.
Against this background, risks to economic activity are likely to be balanced in the medium term.
The current account deficit may widen slightly in the short term even though external balances continue to recover.
The current account balance is being positively affected by the lagged effects of the decline in energy prices.
Moreover, the moderate course of loans and the increasing share of commercial loans in loan composition also support the improvement in the current account balance.
However, the fact that the current economic growth is fueled by the domestic demand and that the tourism sector is experiencing a slowdown signals for a possible deceleration in the recovery of the current account balance in the upcoming period.
Yet, the current account deficit is estimated to hover at reasonable and predictable levels across the year.
Inflation forecasts accommodate both upside and downside risks.
Recent exchange rate developments pose an upside risk to inflation through the cost channel.
Moreover, the possible adjustments to administered prices and taxes to compensate for the effect of the recent rise in budget expenditures on fiscal balances may push inflation upwards towards the end of the year.
On the other hand, latest domestic developments constitute downside risks to demand and inflation through the confidence channel and the tourism sector.
The Committee will closely monitor the developments affecting inflation and take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Despite experiencing significant external shocks in recent years, the adopted policy framework was successful in containing the deterioration in inflation and inflation expectations.
However, at this point, price stability is yet to be achieved.
Ten years of experience with the inflation targeting regime showed that combatting inflation requires joint efforts.
Thus, in order to reduce inflation to the 5-percent target permanently, all institutions must fulfill their duties by taking structural factors into account.
In this respect, actions taken by the Food Committee set an invaluable precedent.
In the upcoming period, the CBRT will contribute to these efforts by undertaking extensive studies to examine structural issues in inflation dynamics.
Global financial markets and capital flows remain highly volatile.
Despite the recent slight rise in the risk appetite, persisting concerns over global growth and uncertainties in global monetary policies feed into volatility.
The tight monetary policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policy and the effective use of the policy tools announced in the road map of August 2015 enhanced the resilience of the economy against external shocks to a certain extent.
However, adverse domestic developments may cause fluctuations in markets if accompanied by global volatilities and this may place extra pressure on financial conditions.
The Committee will closely monitor the developments in both global and domestic markets and take necessary stabilizing measures by utilizing its large variety of tools.
The recent monetary policy decisions of the Committee should be evaluated under the scope of the simplification process.
The ultimate aim of the simplification is to achieve a narrow and symmetrical corridor and provide funding via a single rate.
The simplification is believed to contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism.
Therefore, simplification of the monetary policy is planned to be finalized within a reasonable schedule.
The pace and timing of simplification will depend on the developments regarding inflation and financial stability.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
Sustained fiscal discipline has become essential in reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks in recent years.
In the current environment of highly uncertain global markets, the gains from maintaining and further advancing these achievements are significant.
Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline and reduction in the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In July, consumer prices increased by 1.16 percent, and annual inflation went up by 1.15 points to 8.79 percent.
As stated in the Summary of the .
Committee Meeting of July, this rise was driven by prices of unprocessed food and tobacco products.
Both annual inflation figures and the underlying trends of core indicators followed a flat course in this period.
Having surged in the last two months, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages climbed to 9.69 percent due to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
However, annual inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables registered a decline.
Agricultural prices also displayed a similar path, indicating that the rise in food inflation in this period stemmed from producer prices.
On the other hand, leading indicators regarding August point out a downward correction in unprocessed food prices.
On the energy front, prices fell by 0.40 percent on account of the decline in international oil prices.
Thus, annual energy inflation maintained a low course with 2.40 percent.
Prices of services increased by 1.07 percent, and the annual services inflation rose by 0.30 points to 8.55 percent in July.
Annual inflation increased in transport and communication services, but remained almost unchanged in other sub-groups in this period.
Restaurants and hotels group also exhibited a high monthly rise in line with the high course of food inflation.
Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in rents, which had been high for a while, slowed somewhat in July.
As a result, the underlying trend of services recorded an increase in July.
The surge in unit labor costs in the first quarter coupled with increased rigidities due to the prolonged high course of consumer inflation weigh on services inflation.
On the other hand, the recent deceleration in economic activity may curb services inflation.
Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.31 points to 8.82 percent in July, driven by durable goods.
Prices of durable goods excluding furniture displayed a favorable outlook.
Upon the lingering labor-driven cost pressures since the start of the year, cumulative price increases in the furniture group amounted to 8 percent in the first 7 months.
The underlying core goods inflation posted a decline in July.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira is expected to deteriorate the core goods inflation to some extent in the short term.
Nevertheless, waning cumulative exchange rate effects are likely to pull annual core goods inflation further down in the upcoming period.
In sum, consumer inflation surged in the last two months owing to the unprocessed food prices.
In addition, tobacco products saw price hikes in July as well.
The impact of this rise will be seen also in August, albeit to a relatively limited extent.
The Committee envisages that unprocessed food prices, which saw notable increases in the last couple of months, may display a downward correction in the short term.
Data for the second quarter of 2016 indicate a slowing yet ongoing uptrend in economic activity.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial production index decreased by 1.4 percent in June compared to May.
Thus, following a robust quarterly increase of 1.4 percent in the first quarter, production declined by 0.6 percent in the second quarter.
Despite the favorable figures in exports excluding gold, negative contribution of net exports to growth continued amid the rise in import demand coupled with the growing loss in tourism revenues.
Data on the expenditure side point to a modest course in final domestic demand in the second quarter.
The production of consumer goods posted a decline on a quarterly basis, while that of investment goods remained flat.
Retail trade sales index also exhibited an almost flat pattern, signaling a slowdown compared to the first quarter.
Data regarding the third quarter indicate that the private sector demand may weaken compared to the first half of the year.
In fact, July witnessed decreases in sales of automobiles, white goods and light commercial vehicles.
Meanwhile, the new job posts and the PMI employment data also confirmed the signs of deceleration.
Although developments in tourism revenues will have a negative impact in the short run, the lagged effects of the developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans will continue to contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
The rising demand from the European Union countries continues to have a favorable effect on our exports.
In spite of the persisting geopolitical risks, Turkey’s high market-shifting flexibility continues to support exports.
Meanwhile, the favorable impact of commodity prices on the current account deficit is expected to diminish gradually in coming months.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates posted an increase in May 2016 compared to the previous period.
In this period, non-farm employment growth posted a slowdown, pushing unemployment rates upwards.
The prolonged uptrend in construction employment was interrupted to a limited extent, while industrial employment remained flat after a recovery in the March-April period, and the services employment picked up slightly compared to the past.
The data from the Social Security Institution indicate that the stagnant tourism sector started to have spillovers on employment.
Leading indicators signal a deceleration in employment growth in the short term.
To sum up, economic activity continues to grow at a moderate and stable pace.
Domestic developments of July may cause a pause in this trend in the short term.
However, this is not likely to be a permanent trend, as the recent measures contained the adverse impacts on the markets.
On the other hand, the reduction in tourism revenues is expected to curtail the improvement in the current account balance, rise in employment and growth.
Financial conditions remain tight, while the moderate course of annual loan growth rates continue.
Despite the recent rise in global risk appetite and capital inflows, the improvement in financial conditions is detained due to domestic developments.
The gradual fall in the marginal funding rate spilled over into loan and deposit rates remarkably, yet loan-deposit spreads remain high, and loan standards exercised by banks have not eased.
Moreover, the moderate course of final domestic demand also restricts loan growth.
Given the demand and supply- side factors no noticeable rebound is envisaged in loan growth rates in the short term.
Consumption spending has slowed down slightly, while investment remains relatively sluggish.
Meanwhile, the steady increase in employment and wage developments support domestic demand through the income channel.
Restored relations with Russia may also support external demand gradually.
Accordingly, exports of goods are expected to provide further contributions to growth in the upcoming period.
In this respect, economic activity is expected to show a moderate pace of growth across the year.
Domestic developments in July, geopolitical factors, waning global growth and sluggish tourism sector pose a downside risk to economic activity.
On the other hand, domestic confidence indices have not shown a sharp deterioration.
This, together with the market-shifting flexibility of our exports put a limit on the downside risks.
The volatility in global financial markets has recently eased, and portfolio inflows to emerging markets gained momentum amid the increased risk appetite.
The consequences of the mid-July turmoil in Turkey on financial markets were largely taken back thanks to the rise in the global risk appetite and the liquidity measures.
The tight monetary policy stance, the cautious macroprudential policy and the effective use of the policy tools announced in the road map of August 2015 enhance the resilience of the economy against external shocks.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to take one more measured step towards simplification by lowering the marginal funding rate.
The ultimate aim of simplification is to achieve a narrow and symmetrical corridor and provide funding via a single rate.
Simplification is believed to contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism.
Pioneered by unprocessed food and tobacco products, inflation registered a notable increase in July, while core inflation indicators followed a flat course.
Lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements eased further, underpinning the improvement in core goods inflation.
However, pressures led by unit labor costs and food prices caused the underlying trend of the services inflation to remain high.
In spite of the support from the low level of imported input costs, the improvement in the inflation trend has been limited.
Growing signals for deceleration in domestic demand stemming from the latest domestic developments and the poor outlook in the tourism sector constitute downside risks to demand and inflation.
Nevertheless, exchange rate movements and possible public price/tax adjustments keep the upside risks to inflation brisk.
In this respect, developments regarding the inflation outlook necessitate the maintenance of the tight liquidity policy stance.
In August, consumer prices decreased by 0.29 percent, and annual consumer inflation went down by 0.74 points to 8.05 percent.
Committee Meeting of August, this fall was driven by the correction in the unprocessed food prices.
Prices of tobacco products, on the other hand, manifested the dragged effect of the July correction in August.
In this period, core indicators saw a decline in annual inflation, but a slight increase in underlying trends driven by core goods.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages tumbled down to 6.19 percent due mainly to the decline in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Meanwhile, inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables has exhibited a favorable course lately.
Leading indicators regarding September hint at a prolonged downward correction in unprocessed food inflation.
On the energy front, prices declined on account of the falling fuel prices.
Annual energy inflation climbed to 2.97 percent due to the base effect.
In September, lump-sum SCT applied to fuel products was raised, which is expected to have direct effect on consumer inflation by 0.3 points.
Prices of services increased by 0.71 percent, and the annual services inflation fell by 0.46 points to 8.09 percent in August.
Annual inflation decreased in all sub-groups except rents in this period.
The fall in annual inflation was driven by the favorable course of food prices in addition to the inflation in the prices of restaurant-hotel services that lost pace due to the base effect.
The surge in unit labor costs in the first half of the year played a significant role in the high course of services inflation, while the slowdown in the tourism sector restricts these effects to some extent.
In this respect, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibits a limited deceleration.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.15 points to 8.67 percent in August.
Annual inflation crept up in durable goods, but decreased in other groups.
Lagged effects of the exchange rate on annual core goods inflation display a gradual decline.
However, following the July depreciation in the Turkish lira, the underlying trend in core goods exhibited a slight increase in this period.
In sum, the slowdown in aggregate demand contributes to the gradual fall in core inflation.
With the help of falling food prices, headline inflation is expected to display a decline in the short term.
However, the recent tax adjustment in fuel prices and other cost factors limit the improvement in inflation.
Second-quarter TurkStat data indicate that the GDP grew by an annual 3.1 percent.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, growth has lost some momentum in the second quarter, up only by 0.3 percent after seeing a modest 0.7 percent increase in the first quarter.
Investments remained sluggish while private and public spending provided a major boost to growth.
The spillovers of the tourism slump became more pervasive in the second quarter, causing net exports to have a heightened negative impact on growth.
Recent data releases and indicators for the third quarter point to a deceleration in economic activity.
Calendar and seasonally-adjusted industrial production dipped both monthly and annually due to the domestic turbulence of July and the extended Ramadan holiday.
This plunge is in part attributed to both the loss of working days caused by this holiday extension (bridge-day effects) and the drop in effective working days following July 15.
In fact, recent indicators suggest that the recovery in August and September partly compensated for July’s output loss.
Nevertheless, third-quarter industrial production is expected to be lower than in the second quarter.
The increased EU demand continues to foster exports.
Despite geopolitically-driven negative effects on external demand, Turkey’s flexibility in market diversification remains supportive of exports.
Recent data on external trade signal that non-gold exports were up in August, offsetting the July descent.
Yet, spillovers from the troubled tourism industry into net exports were more pronounced in the summer months.
The tourism slump is likely to have a short-lived negative impact on the current account balance, but the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of consumer loans help to improve the current account balance.
Meanwhile, commodity prices are expected to become gradually less accommodative for the current account deficit in the coming months.
In June, seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were up month-on-month due to narrowing non-farm employment.
Thus, with the deteriorating employment outlook, unemployment rates jumped for the second month in a row.
The employment decline spread across all industries.
Industrial and construction employment dropped while services employment saw a weakening growth.
In light of actual data and leading indicators, unemployment rates are anticipated to surge in the third quarter.
Moreover, the SSI data indicate that the stagnant tourism industry continues to weigh on services employment as of June.
In sum, economic activity is expected to post a quarterly fall in the third quarter.
However, it is envisaged that the negative impact of the downturn in tourism on growth will be more restricted and domestic demand will start to recover on the back of accommodative incentives and measures.
The Committee assesses that current financial conditions are tight.
The rise in global risk appetite helps to ease financial conditions, but loan standards remain tight.
The gradual fall in the marginal funding rate partly passed through into loan and deposit rates.
Loans are likely to see a moderate recovery over the upcoming period with the support coming from accommodative macroprudential measures.
Recently released data and indicators regarding the third quarter display a deceleration in the economic activity.
Unemployment rates which have been on the rise for the second consecutive month due to the worsening employment outlook confirm the economic slowdown.
However, leading indicators imply that the significant slowdown in industrial production observed in July is not permanent.
Despite the adverse effects of geopolitical developments on external demand, exports of goods to EU members remain strong.
Domestic demand is likely to start recovering by the fourth quarter on account of accommodative incentives and measures.
In terms of global economic developments, low levels of advanced economy interest rates and commodity prices continue to affect the Turkish economy favorably.
Although the uncertainty over global monetary policies have somewhat heightened, emerging economies continue to attract portfolio inflows.
In light of these developments and considering its contribution to the effectiveness of monetary policy, the Committee decided to take a measured and prudent step towards simplification.
The simplification of the monetary policy is planned to be finalized within a reasonable schedule.
Inflation was down in August owing to improving indicators for unprocessed food and core inflation.
The lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements on annual inflation eased further.
However, the implications of the Turkish lira’s July depreciation for core goods and the pressures from unit labor costs and rigidities on services caused the underlying core inflation to remain high.
In spite of gains from lower imported-input costs, the underlying inflation improved only marginally.
For the upcoming period, the slowing aggregate demand may contribute to the gradual decline in core inflation while falling food prices are expected to pull inflation down in the short term.
Nevertheless, adjustments in fuel taxes and other cost-related developments put upward pressure on inflation and require the maintenance of a cautious monetary policy stance.
Taking into account inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and the course of other factors affecting inflation, the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained.
Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline and reduction in the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long- term government securities at low levels.
In September, consumer prices went up by 0.18 percent, while annual consumer inflation fell by 0.77 points to 7.28 percent.
Committee Meeting of September, being driven by unprocessed food prices, the deceleration in food inflation continued.
Moreover, weakening demand conditions also supported the disinflation process.
On the other hand, the tax rise in fuel products curbed the improvement in inflation through direct and indirect effects.
Core indicators’ annual inflation declined while their underlying trends somewhat improved in this period.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages decreased by 2.03 points to 4.16 percent due mainly to the decline in prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Meanwhile, inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables maintained its favorable course.
Leading indicators regarding October suggest some increase in food inflation.
On the energy front, prices increased on account of rising taxes on fuel products.
Annual energy inflation climbed to 4.56 percent.
Recent developments in the exchange rate and international oil prices are envisaged to push October energy inflation upwards, yet this adverse effect is likely to be partly offset by the reduction in natural gas prices at the start of the month.
Prices of services increased by 0.89 percent, and annual services inflation inched up by 0.11 points to 8.19 percent in September.
Annual inflation increased in transport services; remained flat in rent, and decreased in other sub-groups in this period.
Inflation in the restaurant-hotel group decelerated further due to the favorable course of food prices stemming from the contraction in tourism, whereas prices of transport services witnessed an upsurge amid fuel price hikes.
In this respect, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an uptick.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 1.70 points to 6.97 percent in September.
Being more evident in durable goods, annual inflation decreased in all subgroups.
The fall in core goods inflation is attributed to the waning cumulative effects of the 1 exchange rate coupled with the deceleration in domestic demand.
Accordingly, the underlying trend in core goods exhibited a remarkable slowdown in this period.
However, exchange rate developments and other cost factors limit the improvement in inflation outlook.
Recent data releases and indicators for the third quarter point to deceleration in economic activity.
The second-quarter plunge in industrial production has deepened due to the sharp drop in July.
This output fall in July is largely attributed to the demand-side effects of the domestic turbulence as well as to the loss of working days caused by the Ramadan holiday and the incidents of July 15.
In fact, industrial production recovered by a rapid 9.4 percent month-on-month in August, confirming that July’s output loss was not a good indicator of the underlying trend.
Both PMI indicators for new orders and output and the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate edged upward in September.
Notwithstanding the upbeat outlook suggested by survey indicators, production may see a renewed slowdown due to bridge-day effects caused by the extended holiday for the Sacrifice Feast in September, leading to a quarter-on-quarter decline in industrial production in the third quarter.
Domestic demand is expected to pick up by the fourth quarter amid accommodative incentives and measures.
July’s domestic tensions dampened final domestic demand to a great extent through both consumer and investment spending.
In the July- August period, the production and imports of consumer goods and the consumption of durable goods were markedly down from the second quarter.
On the investment front, data on the production and imports of machinery and equipment showed that investments remained weak over the third quarter.
An indicator for construction activity, the production and imports of nonmetallic minerals declined, suggesting that construction investments slowed in the third quarter.
Recent data signal that domestic demand started to rebound in the fourth quarter.
Consumer loans have inched up in recent months thanks to more accommodative monetary conditions and other measures in place, confirming expectations of an upturn for the final quarter.
Restoration of producer and consumer confidence due to waning uncertainties and demand-stimulating policies will be the main drivers of economic recovery in the upcoming period.
Growing EU demand continued to bolster exports.
Turkey’s flexibility in market diversification continues to cushion exports against the negative effects of geopolitical tensions on external demand.
Yet, recent data show that exports and imports of goods were largely affected by the July turbulence.
Despite some recovery in August and September, trade of goods declined in the third quarter.
Spillovers from the troubled tourism industry into net exports were more 2 pronounced in the summer months.
The tourism slump continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is somewhat alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of consumer loans.
However, commodity prices are expected to become gradually less accommodative for the current account deficit in the coming months.
The deteriorating labor market outlook of May and June continued into July due to falling industrial employment, causing unemployment rates to remain on the rise.
Employment gains in services lost more pace amid sluggish economic activity.
Across non-farm industries, the previous quarter’s decline in construction employment came to a halt.
Additionally, according to the SSI data on registered employees, the employment fall in major tourism industries (accommodation, travel agents and tour operators) turned around in July.
Moreover, the PMI for industrial employment signals no additional deterioration for September yet remains low.
Given the weak economic activity and leading indicators for employment, unemployment rates are expected to climb further in the third quarter.
In sum, economic activity is expected to recede in the third quarter.
However, domestic demand is envisaged to pick up in the upcoming period on the back of less uncertainty, restored producer and consumer confidence, incentives stimulating domestic demand and recovering consumer loans.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term projections to be published in the October Inflation Report.
In the third quarter of the year, inflation recorded a decline on account of the improvements in unprocessed food and core inflation indicators.
While the lagged effects of the cumulative exchange rate developments on annual inflation continued to wane, slowing aggregate demand supported disinflation and the underlying trend of core inflation improved.
However, the tax rise in fuel products restrained the recovery in inflation through energy and transport prices.
Although the developments in TL-denominated import prices are expected to push inflation upwards, the mild course of aggregate demand is projected to support the gradual decline in core inflation.
Moreover, forecasts are based on the assumption that the year-end food inflation in 2016 and 2017 will be lower than the projections of the previous Report amid the tourism-induced slowdown in food demand and the actions taken by the Food Committee.
Accordingly, the year-end consumer inflation forecast for 2016 remained unchanged as downside and upside effects on inflation cancelled each other out.
On the other hand, end-2017 consumer inflation forecast was revised upwards by 0.5 points as the upside effects driven by import prices outweighed the effects of the downward revision in the output gap and food inflation.
Overall financial conditions is buoyed by macroprudential arrangements and reduced tightness in monetary conditions thanks to the CBRT’s policy actions.
The 3 gradual fall in the marginal funding rate has partially passed through to loan and deposit rates.
Supported also by the recently enforced macroprudential measures, consumer loans displayed recovery in the last couple of months.
On the other hand, due to global and geopolitical developments that had effects on domestic financial markets, tightness in loan conditions has not witnessed a notable decline yet.
As the downgrade of Turkey’s sovereign credit rating to below investment grade at the end of September was largely anticipated by markets, the reaction of financial markets remained limited.
Even though this downgrade weighs on external funding costs, loan conditions are supported by liquidity measures, macroprudential arrangements and other incentives.
On the other hand, the CBRT may introduce accommodative adjustments to required reserves and other liquidity instruments in case of a higher- than-expected tightness in financial conditions.
The latest data indicate a significant slowdown in economic activity in the third quarter.
Recent accommodative measures and incentives are projected to stimulate a rebound in domestic demand starting from the last quarter.
Accordingly, economic activity is expected to register a mild growth in the remainder of 2016 and throughout 2017.
However, the pace of the recovery in tourism revenues, the global economic outlook, the uncertainties regarding the monetary policies of advanced economies and geopolitical developments pose downside risks to economic activity.
The CBRT will continue to monitor closely the impacts of the developments in economic activity on price stability and financial stability.
There are both upside and downside risks to inflation forecasts.
Inflation may settle on a lower-than-expected path, should economic activity recover at a slower-than- envisioned pace in the upcoming period.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding oil prices and global markets pose an upside risk to inflation through the cost channel.
Meanwhile, the volatility in food prices pose risks in both directions for 2017.
The CBRT will closely monitor the developments affecting inflation and take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Leading indicators for the third quarter of 2016 point to a mild improvement in global economic activity.
However, due to the historically low levels of global growth and trade volume, interest rates in advanced economies remain low.
Accordingly, risk appetite towards emerging economies has followed a robust course in recent months.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding global monetary policies cause fluctuations in portfolio inflows.
In fact, amid strengthened perceptions about the Fed’s possible rate hike coupled with the uncertainties regarding the monetary policies of other advanced economies, portfolio flows towards emerging economies have recently trended downwards after a surge following the previous reporting period.
Against this background, marginal funding rate, which was gradually lowered under the simplification process since March 2016, was kept constant in October.
The completion of the simplification will ensure funding via a single rate, thereby 4 bringing short-term market rates closer to the CBRT funding rate.
Simplification is believed to contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism by providing better assessment of the monetary policy stance.
Therefore, simplification of the monetary policy will be finalized within a reasonable schedule.
The direction and the timing of simplification will depend on the developments regarding inflation and financial stability.
Despite experiencing significant external shocks in recent years, the adopted policy framework proved successful in containing the deterioration in inflation and inflation expectations.
Ten years of experience in inflation targeting showed that combatting inflation requires joint efforts.
Thus, to reduce inflation to the 5-percent target permanently, all institutions must fulfill their duties under a holistic approach by also taking structural factors into account.
In the upcoming period, the CBRT will contribute to these efforts by undertaking extensive studies to raise awareness regarding structural issues in inflation dynamics.
In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will continue to depend on the inflation outlook.
The CBRT will maintain its cautious monetary policy stance by taking into account the developments regarding inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation.
Developments in fiscal policy and tax adjustments are monitored closely with regard to their effects on the inflation outlook.
In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has become one of the major factors in reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks.
Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline and reduction in the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping the interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In October, consumer prices went up by 1.44 percent, while annual consumer inflation fell by 0.12 points to 7.16 percent.
Committee Meeting of October, food inflation increased, yet annual inflation in core indicators declined due to the fall in core goods and services inflation.
The underlying trends of core indicators slowed due to the prices of services in this period.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.04 points to 5.20 percent.
Although annual inflation in unprocessed food increased mostly due to the prices of vegetables, seasonally-adjusted prices recorded a decline in October as in the preceding two months.
Meanwhile, annual food inflation excluding fresh fruits and vegetables maintained its favorable course.
Leading indicators regarding November suggest a substantial decline in annual food inflation.
On the energy front, fuel prices drove annual energy inflation upwards in October to 4.71 percent, despite the reduction in natural gas prices.
The rise in fuel prices is attributed to the sustained effects of the raised SCT through October as well as the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the uptrend in oil prices.
Prices of services inched up by 0.35 percent, and annual services inflation fell by 0.39 points to 7.80 percent in October.
Annual inflation increased in rent, remained flat in the restaurant-hotel group and decreased in other sub-groups in this period.
Annual rent inflation remained on the increase due to the İstanbul and hit 9.11 percent.
Inflation in other services receded amid the slowdown in economic activity.
In this respect, the underlying trend of services inflation slowed down.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.83 points to 6.15 percent in October.
The waning cumulative effects of the exchange rate coupled with the deceleration in domestic demand drove annual inflation down in all subgroups.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira confined the improvement in annual core goods inflation.
The underlying trend of core goods inflation remained flat in this period.
In sum, the slowdown in aggregate demand contributes to the fall in inflation.
However, the recent exchange rate movements resulting from increased global uncertainty and high volatility limit the improvement in inflation outlook.
Recently released data indicate a deceleration in economic activity for the third quarter.
The second-quarter downturn in industrial output deepened in the third quarter.
Third-quarter production was principally hit by the loss of working days caused by the extended religious holidays in July and September and the incidents of July 15.
Even excluding these effects, which are to be counterbalanced in the fourth quarter, underlying production was down, albeit at a slower clip.
Being more pronounced as of the third quarter, the slump in tourism revenues was a key driver of the slowing underlying output growth through its direct and indirect effects.
The Committee reported that economic activity edged up when adjusted for working days that sparked an output fluctuation in the second half.
Recent indicators hint at a more upbeat outlook for the fourth quarter.
Production picked up slightly across credit-sensitive sectors, especially the motor industry, and related fields of activity.
Given the base effect from unworked days, industrial production is expected to record a marked quarter-on-quarter rebound in the fourth quarter.
July’s domestic tensions dampened final domestic demand through both consumer and investment spending in the third quarter.
Data on production and imports suggest that the third-quarter consumption fall was more severe for durable goods.
On the capital goods front, the slowdown spilled over into all industries.
In fact, the production and imports of machinery and equipment and of minerals were down in the third quarter.
The slide in construction employment confirms the weakening construction industry.
Economic activity is expected to recover by the final quarter amid accommodative incentives and measures.
This estimation is supported by the data on mortgage and auto markets.
Thanks to more accommodative monetary conditions and other newly-adopted measures, consumer loans gained modestly in recent months, buoying up the improvement projected for the final quarter.
Moreover, the public sector is likely to provide an increased investment support for growth in the fourth quarter.
Yet, the recent Turkish lira plunge and volatile exchange rates might weigh on private demand in the upcoming period, curbing already weak investments in particular.
The repercussions of exchange rate changes on the confidence over company balance sheets and the overall economic environment will be the main factors affecting the pace of growth in the coming months.
The growing EU demand continues to bolster exports.
Turkey’s flexibility in market diversification continues to cushion exports against the negative effects of 2 geopolitical tensions on external demand.
Moreover, newly-restored relations with Russia translated into a boost for exports.
The gloomy tourism industry continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of loans.
However, commodity prices are expected to become gradually less accommodative for the current account deficit in the upcoming period.
The labor market outlook continued to deteriorate in August due to sluggish economic activity.
Across nonfarm sectors, industrial employment remained on the decline, albeit at a slower rate, while construction employment was flat.
Employment continued to edge up in services.
Leading indicators point to an upturn in underlying unemployment.
However, given the waning effects of the July turmoil, the significant rise in October’s PMI employment index boding well for industrial employment gains and the subsiding repercussions of the tourism slump, the climb in unemployment might come to a standstill.
In short, economic activity is expected to post a quarterly fall in the third quarter.
Domestic demand is envisaged to pick up in the upcoming period on the back of incentives stimulating domestic demand and recovering consumer loans.
Given the base effect from unworked days of the third quarter, economic activity is likely to accelerate on a quarterly basis in the final quarter, producing a moderate growth for 2016.
However, the tightening in financial conditions driven by the recent global turbulence remains a downside risk on domestic demand recovery.
The CBRT’s liquidity measures and macroprudential policies remain accommodative for financial conditions.
Consumer loans have grown recently, particularly for mortgages, amid falling interest rates and macroprudential measures.
Nevertheless, due to global and geopolitical spillovers into domestic financial markets, commercial loans have yet to pick up robustly.
Long-term interest rates are currently on the rise across advanced economies, while projections for policy rates are revised upwards.
The high likelihood of a Fed rate hike in December and the increased global uncertainty driven by the US presidential election send emerging financial markets into turbulence, inducing portfolio outflows.
The negative impact of all these developments on lending standards is partly counterbalanced by liquidity measures, macroprudential policies and other incentives.
Should financial conditions tighten more than expected, the CBRT will continue to use required reserves and other liquidity tools to support markets.
Domestic demand is expected to start recovering by the fourth quarter amid accommodative incentives and measures.
Yet, global market turmoil and geopolitical risks keep a firm lid on the pace of economic recovery.
Thus, economic activity is likely to grow modestly over the upcoming period.
The CBRT will continue 3 to monitor how developments in economic activity would affect price stability and financial stability.
The Committee stated that adopting structural reforms may boost the economy’s growth potential to a large extent.
The slower-than-expected economic recovery remains a downside risk to inflation, while exchange rate movements driven by heightened global uncertainty and volatility pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
The Committee decided to implement monetary tightening to contain the adverse impact of exchange rate developments on expectations and the pricing behavior.
Moreover, this decision is expected to have more profound effects through supportive measures for the currency market.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to provide repayment flexibility for export rediscount credits and to reduce the quantity of foreign-exchange required reserves.
In the upcoming period, monetary policy decisions will depend on the inflation outlook.
The CBRT will maintain its cautious stance by taking into account the developments in inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation.
The Committee maintains its position that the simplification should be completed within an appropriate time frame.
The gains that were planned through simplification are performing to a great extent.
The direction and the timing of the next step toward simplification will depend on the developments in inflation and financial stability.
In the current environment of high global uncertainty, it is critical to maintain and further enhance these achievements.
Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline and to reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping the interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
In November, consumer prices went up by 0.52 percent, while annual consumer inflation fell by 0.16 points to 7.0 percent.
Committee Meeting of November, annual food inflation receded considerably, while energy inflation increased due to the depreciation in the Turkish lira.
On the other hand, the effect of recent exchange rate movements on core inflation indicators remained relatively limited due to the slowdown in aggregate demand.
Thus, the underlying trends of core indicators displayed a practically flat course.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages fell by 1.65 points to 3.55 percent, which was led by the falling unprocessed food prices due to the decline in the prices of vegetables.
Annual processed food inflation remained on the decline.
Leading indicators regarding December suggest an uptick in annual food inflation on account of the unprocessed food inflation.
Energy prices increased by 1.05 points in November and the depreciation in the Turkish lira resulted in overall price hikes in the sector.
Thus, annual energy inflation rose by 1.44 points to 6.15 percent.
This rise is expected to continue in December due to the uptrend in the exchange rate coupled with oil prices.
In addition to food and energy groups, recent tax adjustments introduced to some items, chiefly tobacco products, is envisaged to put a noticeable upside pressure on December inflation.
Prices of services recorded an uptick by 0.29 percent, and annual services inflation crept up by 0.14 points to 7.94 percent in November.
Annual inflation decreased in transport and rent, but increased in other sub-groups in this period.
Consequences of the slowdown in domestic demand and the tourism sector were evident in the prices of services, while some groups reflected the effect of depreciation of the 1 Turkish lira as well.
In this respect, the underlying trend of services inflation registered a slight increase.
Annual core goods inflation inched down by 0.22 points to 5.92 percent in November.
Inflation plummeted in the clothing group, but increased in durable goods.
Recent exchange rate developments had a limited effect on durable goods in November.
This month was marked by a notable depreciation in the Turkish lira, while aggregate demand conditions confined the deterioration in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
In sum, the effect of the recent rise in exchange rate and oil prices on inflation remained relatively limited due to aggregate demand conditions.
The GDP narrowed by 1.8 percent year-on-year in the third quarter and grew by 2.2 percent through the first nine months of 2016.
The Committee assessed that the underlying growth of economic activity is not as slow as third-quarter GDP data suggest.
In fact, mid-July incidents and the loss of working days caused by extended religious holidays had far more implications than normal calendar effects.
Adjusted for such effects, the economy is estimated to register a year-on-year expansion rather than a contraction in the third quarter.
In the third quarter, value-added was up in construction but down in agriculture, industry and services on a yearly basis.
On the spending front, public consumption provided further support to growth.
Meanwhile, construction investments contributed to annual growth positively whereas machinery and equipment investments and private spending declined.
Domestic demand continued to prop up growth, albeit to a lesser extent, while the effects of the tourism slump became more pronounced and net exports provided an increased negative contribution to growth.
Recent data indicate that economic activity rebounded somewhat in the fourth quarter after the third-quarter deceleration.
With working day losses led by extended religious holidays counterbalanced and the underlying trend on a modest upward track, industrial output increased in October.
Data on the production and exports of electricity and vehicles point to further growth in industrial output for November.
Thus, industrial production is likely to post a quarterly gain in the fourth quarter thanks to the base effect from unworked days.
However, apart from the 2 very much technical recovery driven by working day effects, the economy recovery seems to be a moderate one yet to spread across all sectors.
Economic activity is expected to recover further amid accommodative incentives and measures.
Thanks to more accommodative monetary conditions and other newly- adopted measures, consumer loans have picked up in recent months, bolstering the prospects for a gradual improvement.
Moreover, the public sector is expected to provide further investment support to growth in the coming months.
The growing EU demand continues to stimulate total exports, the auto industry in particular.
Furthermore, the newly-restored relations with Russia translated into a boost for exports.
The labor market decline that began in May paused in September amid rising nonfarm employment.
The growth in nonfarm employment was mostly driven by the increased construction employment.
Meanwhile, services and industrial employment picked up only modestly.
Leading indicators such as new job vacancies and unemployment insurance claims suggest that employment remains subdued and unemployment rates will remain at high levels.
In sum, economic activity edged up in the fourth quarter and is expected to record a moderate growth in 2016.
However, the potential impact of recent global and geopolitical developments on financial conditions and the lack of any signs of a rosy tourism outlook remain a downside risk to the pace of economic recovery.
Consumer loans continue to improve amid falling interest rates and macroprudential measures.
Nevertheless, due to global and geopolitical spillovers into domestic financial markets, commercial loans remain weak.
Measures taken by 3 the Economic Coordination Committee to uplift the real sector are expected to help commercial loans increase in the upcoming period.
The ongoing uncertainty over global monetary policies and enhanced Fed rate hike prospects lead to financial market volatility and portfolio outflows in emerging economies.
To counteract their negative spillovers into exchange rates and lending standards, the CBRT maintains a stabilizing stance for FX liquidity and a supportive macroprudential policy stance.
Thus, economic activity is likely to grow moderately in the upcoming period.
The CBRT will continue to monitor the developments in economic activity and their implications for price stability and financial stability.
The Committee stated that adopting structural reforms might boost the economy’s growth potential to a large extent.
Exchange rate movements and rising oil prices fueled by the recently heightened global uncertainty pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
Recent price movements and current weather forecasts add to the upside risks to food prices for the coming months, which, however, are curbed by aggregate demand.
The Committee agreed that future developments should be closely monitored to determine the net effects of these factors on the inflation outlook for 2017.
Against this background, the Committee kept the marginal funding rate constant in December and maintains its position that the simplification should be completed within an appropriate time frame.
Monetary policy decisions will depend on the inflation outlook in the upcoming period.
The CBRT will maintain its cautious stance in light of future developments in inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation.
The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there 4 will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
In December, consumer prices were up 1.64 percent, while annual inflation rose by 1.53 points to 8.53 percent.
As stated in December’s Summary of the .
Committee Meeting, annual food inflation soared amid higher unprocessed food prices, while energy inflation continued to climb due to the outlook for exchange rates and oil prices.
In addition, recent tax adjustments, particularly on tobacco, put a marked upward pressure on inflation.
Moreover, the plunging Turkish lira drove the annual inflation and underlying trend of core indicators higher.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages surged by 2.10 points to 5.65 percent, largely due to unprocessed food prices rising amid adverse weather conditions and exchange rate developments.
Annual processed food inflation remained virtually flat.
Leading indicators for January signal a continued uptrend in annual food inflation on the back of unprocessed food prices.
Energy prices increased by 2.15 percent in December, with the upswing spread across all subcategories due to soaring oil prices and the tumbling Turkish lira.
Thus, annual energy inflation increased by a total of 5.70 points in the last four months to 8.67 percent.
Leading indicators suggest that energy inflation has remained on the rise over January due to exchange rate changes.
Prices of services edged up by 0.38 percent, while annual services inflation rose by 0.17 points to 8.11 percent in December.
Annual inflation decreased in transport, remained almost flat in communication and went up in other subcategories.
The slowdown in domestic demand and the sluggish tourism industry spilled over into prices of services, while several subcategories reflected the effects of the Turkish lira depreciation.
Annual core goods inflation inched up by 0.84 points to 6.77 percent in December.
Annual inflation decreased in clothing, but increased in other subcategories.
Among durables goods, all subcategories, home appliances in particular, saw considerable price hikes.
Automobile prices were affected by the SCT hike, along with exchange 1 rate developments.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira was evident in core good prices in December despite restrictive domestic demand conditions.
Although aggregate demand conditions put a downward pressure, inflation is expected to remain on an upward track in the short term due to the lagged exchange rate pass-through and volatile unprocessed food prices.
Despite a mild production growth across exporting industries, sectors with a relatively higher sensitivity to domestic demand weakened, causing industrial output to remain flat in November.
Data on the production of electricity and vehicles and exports point to a modest growth in industrial output for December.
Thus, industrial production is likely to post a quarterly gain in the fourth quarter thanks to the base effect coming from working day adjustment.
However, apart from the technical recovery driven by working day effects, there is only a moderate recovery in economic activity which is not evenly spread across all sectors.
Current data indicate the external demand was more robust than domestic demand in the fourth quarter.
Non-gold exports were up quarter-on-quarter in the October- November period, while non-gold imports edged down.
Likewise, the PMI’s new export orders rose above the neutral mark in the fourth quarter, while total orders posted a small quarterly gain.
In this period, domestic sales of automobiles and home appliances were robust amid brought-forward demand, whereas the demand for services was on the decline, particularly in retail.
The data on mortgage and auto markets accompanied by the recent recovery in consumer loans bolster the projections for a gradual improvement.
Turkey’s flexibility in diversifying markets continues to cushion exports against the negative effects of geopolitical tensions on external demand.
Furthermore, the newly-restored relations with neighbor countries translated into a boost for exports.
The sluggish outlook in tourism sector continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of loans.
However, commodity prices are expected to gradually have a less of a positive influence on the current account deficit in the upcoming period.
The deterioration in the labor market, which began in May, continued through October.
This period saw modest increases in services and industrial employment in contrast to a decline in the construction sector.
Meanwhile, leading indicators such 2 as new job vacancies and unemployment insurance claims suggest that employment remains subdued and unemployment rates will continue to remain high.
In sum, economic activity slightly recovered in the fourth quarter and is expected to record a moderate growth in 2016.
However, reverberations of recent market volatility through confidence channel, the potential impact of recent global and geopolitical developments on financial conditions and the lack of any signs of improvement in tourism outlook limit the pace of economic recovery.
Following the US elections in November 2016, global economic uncertainties intensified.
In this period, long-term interest rates increased in advanced economies, while capital flows towards emerging economies subsided.
The increased likelihood of the adoption of protective policies in the US following the elections poses a downside risk to the pace of growth and employment in emerging economies.
In addition, the increased possibility of accommodative fiscal policies to be adopted by the US may lead to accelerated rate hikes by the Fed, which may result in further tightening of financial conditions in emerging economies.
Not only the ongoing uncertainties in global markets but also the geopolitical and domestic developments caused fluctuations in domestic financial markets in the fourth quarter of 2016.
The adverse impact of these on financial conditions are partially counterbalanced through liquidity measures, macroprudential policies and other incentives.
In fact, consumer loans and TL-denominated commercial loans have recently been signaling for recovery.
On the other hand, tax arrangements done in the last quarter of the year, coupled with exchange rate developments led the demand for automobiles and durable goods to be brought forward at end-2016.
Thus, the revival in consumer loans may lose some pace in the first quarter of 2017.
Recently-released data hint at a noticeable economic slowdown in the third quarter of the year.
Thanks to the accommodative incentives and measures, domestic demand recorded an improvement in the last quarter.
Nevertheless, sectoral diffusion of this improvement remained limited and underlying trend of economic activity registered a mild growth.
Recent indicators suggest that the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the repercussions through confidence channel may lead to a slowdown in domestic demand in the first quarter of the year.
However, as uncertainties and volatility in financial markets wane, the economy is expected to revert to its underlying trend in the ensuing period and display a moderate growth in 2017.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, the global economic outlook, uncertainties regarding the monetary policies of advanced economies and geopolitical developments pose downside risks to the economic activity, while possible lagged effects of recent incentives and measures are considered as the upside risk factor.
Retaining price stability as the main objective, the CBRT closely monitors also the reverberations of the downside risks to economic activity on financial stability.
The Committee evaluated medium-term projections to be presented in the January Inflation Report in the meeting.
In the last quarter, inflation increased due to the energy, alcohol-tobacco and unprocessed food groups.
Although aggregate demand conditions continued to be disinflationary, rises in the exchange rate and commodity prices increased the underlying trend of core inflation.
In the short term, the base effect from unprocessed food prices and developments in the TL-denominated import prices are expected to drive inflation upwards significantly.
Hence, it is projected that despite the restrictive effect of the mild course of aggregate demand, inflation will remain high for a while due to cost pressures, and display a gradual decline as of the second half of the year.
Forecasts are based on the assumption that despite the tourism-induced slowdown in food demand and the support from the actions taken by the Food Committee, the base effect from unprocessed food prices, the probable effects of the adverse weather conditions on the food supply and the exchange rate developments will push the end-2017 food inflation upwards compared to the figures of the previous report.
Accordingly, year-end inflation forecasts for 2017 and 2018 were revised upwards by 1.5 and 1 points, respectively compared to the October Inflation Report.
Given a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, inflation is likely to be 8 percent in 2017, 6 percent in 2018 and stabilize around 5 percent in 2019.
There are both downside and upside risks to inflation forecasts, yet upside risks to end-2017 inflation forecast seem more evident.
Recently, the marked rise in foreign exchange market volatility poses an upside risk to inflation from expectations and pricing behavior channels as well as from the cost channel.
On the other hand, the projected disinflationary effect of demand conditions may be higher, if economic activity recovers slower than expected in the period ahead.
to food inflation - another factor shaping forecasts- are considered to be balanced.
Despite the possibility of food inflation to prove higher than expected still resides amid adverse weather conditions and the reverberations of the exchange rate, measures taken by the Food Committee are believed to counterbalance these risks.
The CBRT will closely monitor the developments regarding inflation outlook and continue to take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Against this background, starting from January 2017, the CBRT took a series of liquidity measures in response to the excessive exchange rate volatility and deterioration in the inflation outlook and decided to strengthen the tight monetary policy stance in the January MPC Meeting.
In this respect, the marginal funding rate and the late liquidity window lending rate were hiked by 75 and 100 basis points to 9.25 and 11 percent, respectively.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
Moreover, necessary 4 liquidity measures will be taken in case of unhealthy pricing behavior in the foreign exchange market that cannot be justified by economic fundamentals.
The fact that the excessive volatility observed in the foreign exchange market in January 2017 was not accompanied by a change in macro framework or economic fundamentals, required a dynamic tightening practice inclusive of alternative liquidity instruments.
While a simple policy framework enhances the effectiveness of transmission mechanism, it does not rule out these type of dynamic reactions.
The contribution of adjustments in administered prices to consumer inflation in 2016 was above historical averages.
This emerged as one of the main determinants of higher inflation than the CBRT’s forecasts issued at the start of the year.
The baseline monetary policy stance for the upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
Moreover, the room provided by the fiscal discipline facilitates the countercyclical implementation of the fiscal policy in periods of slowing economic activity without a permanent deterioration in budget balances, as in 2016.
Nevertheless, designing public spending and tax policies in a way that takes into account the subsequent effects on macroeconomic variables other than fiscal accounts such as growth, domestic savings and inflation, will contribute to the coordination of monetary policy and fiscal policy, and enhance macroeconomic stability.
In February, consumer prices were up 0.81 percent and annual inflation increased by 0.91 points to 10.13 percent.
Annual food inflation continued to climb while exchange rate changes seemed to be passed through to all items, especially to core goods and energy.
Notwithstanding temporary tax reductions, the cumulative TL depreciation caused the core goods inflation to soar, driving the annual inflation and underlying trend of core indicators higher.
Annual inflation in food and non‐alcoholic beverages rose by 0.95 points in February to 8.72 percent, largely due to higher prices of fresh fruits and other unprocessed food.
On the processed food front, the monthly price increase gained momentum while the annual inflation rose to 7.06 percent.
Leading indicators for March signal a sharp upswing in annual food price inflation mainly on the back of the base effect from unprocessed food.
Energy prices remained on an uptrend, which spread across all subcategories.
Thus, annual energy inflation soared by 2.34 points in February to 13.94 percent.
Annual energy inflation is expected to edge down in March amid on back of international oil prices.
Prices of services rose by 0.68 percent while annual services inflation edged up by 0.10 points to 8.37 percent in February.
Annual inflation increased in transport and communication but remained relatively flat in other subcategories.
Transport services were largely affected by the cumulative increase in fuel prices.
Rent inflation remained elevated at 9.4 percent.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.65 points to 8.83 percent in February.
All subcategories were influenced by the spillovers from the depreciating Turkish lira.
February discounts lagged well behind historical averages in the clothing industry despite weaker output and external demand, whereas temporary tax cuts put a lid on price hikes in durable goods.
Prices were also significantly higher across core goods other than clothing and durables due to the exchange rate pass‐through as well as the increased customs duty on cosmetics.
The cumulative depreciation of 1 the Turkish lira may continue to put upward pressure on core goods inflation in March.
In short, cost push pressures and the volatility in food prices in recent months have led to a sharp increase in inflation.
The significant rise in inflation is expected to continue in the short term due to lagged pass‐through and the base effect in unprocessed food prices.
Recently released data indicate a gradual recovery in the economic activity.
Industrial production posted a quarterly growth in the fourth quarter of 2016.
However, subtracting the offset work day losses of the third quarter, the output growth is a moderate one that fails to spread across all sectors.
Auto and home sales were robust in the fourth quarter thanks to demand being brought forward, yet only a number of sectors saw a recovering domestic demand.
Moreover, although public investments provided an added boost to the economy, the recovery in investment demand was much slower than in consumption.
With the supportive measures and incentives provided recently, the recovery in the economic activity is expected to continue at a moderate pace.
First‐quarter data suggest that the economic recovery is moderate and not quite widespread yet.
Despite a strong industrial production in January, the sectoral growth is uneven and the underlying trend is weaker.
Although the production in industrial sectors subject to incentives, such as furniture and construction, showed signs of recovery, the gloomy outlook in sectors of services, particularly retail, suggested that there is no strong recovery in domestic demand.
In fact, domestic demand seems to be slowing due to demand being brought forward in the fourth quarter of 2016 as well as the recent TL plunge and the weakening confidence.
However, the extension of housing tax reductions and recent employment incentives are likely to buoy up domestic demand and growth in the coming months.
Despite a relatively sluggish domestic demand, the growing EU demand continues to stimulate total exports, the auto industry in particular.
Furthermore, the restoring relations with neighboring countries translated into a boost for exports.
The sluggish outlook in tourism sector continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the recent developments in real exchange rates and the moderate course of loans.
The deterioration in the labor market that began in May continued through December.
In this period, industrial and construction employment fell whereas services employment remained flat.
Meanwhile, leading indicators, such as new job vacancies, the PMI employment index and the expected number of employees in 2 services and construction, suggest that employment is subdued and unemployment rates will remain high.
In sum, economic activity exhibited a gradual recovery in the last quarter and a moderate growth is expected for 2016.
Economic activity is projected to display a slow gradual and slow rebound in 2017.
However, the course of capital flows in line with uncertainties regarding global economic policies, geopolitical developments, the subsided course of the labor market and the lingering volatility in exchange rates may stand out as factors to limit the pace of growth in 2017. .
Leading indicators and expectations regarding global economic activity have recently been favorable.
Both the electoral climate in Europe and news on how the US trade and fiscal policies will be shaped weigh on the volatility in financial markets, while diminished uncertainties over global monetary policies support the global risk appetite.
Backed also by positive growth prospects, portfolio inflows are observed in emerging economies.
Meanwhile, following a marked increase in 2016, global energy prices displayed a steady outlook in the last couple of months owing to favorable supply conditions in the energy market.
Parallel to a tighter stance in January 2017, Turkey’s financial indicators have recorded an improvement.
Recent losses in all indicators were mostly redeemed, which led to a positive divergence between Turkey and other emerging economies.
Moreover, loan rates remain mild despite the rise in the CBRT funding rate; and the revival in loan growth continues due to the partial recovery in growth outlook, macroprudential arrangements and public incentives.
In fact, consumer loans and TL‐denominated commercial loan growth caught up with past averages.
Domestic demand registered a recovery in the last quarter of 2016, yet sectoral diffusion of this recovery proved limited and the underlying trend of the economy exhibited a mild growth.
Recent indicators show that the TL depreciation and the confidence channel have led to a deceleration in domestic demand.
Nevertheless, owing both to waning uncertainties and volatility in the financial markets and the incentives supporting the economy, a mild economic growth is expected in the upcoming period.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, the global economic outlook, uncertain global economic policies and geopolitical developments pose a downside risk to economic activity.
Meanwhile, possible lagged effects of recent incentives and measures are considered to be upside risks.
The mild trend in economic activity notwithstanding, cost pressures arising out of the cumulative effects of the depreciation in the TL led to a significant rise in inflation.
Exchange rate volatility pose an upside risk to inflation through the cost channel as well as the expectations and the pricing behavior channel.
In the coming period, not only the lagged effects of the exchange rate developments but also the 3 base effect from unprocessed food prices is projected to push inflation further upwards in the short term.
Against this background, the Committee decided to strengthen the monetary tightening in order to contain the deterioration in the inflation outlook.
At the March meeting, the late liquidity window lending rate was raised from 11 percent to 11.75 percent, while the other CBRT rates were kept unchanged.
Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
The baseline monetary policy stance for the upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices and taxes.
Accordingly, the gradual elimination of the effect of 2016 tax increases on annual inflation may support the disinflation process.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework, and consequently have an adverse effect on the medium‐term inflation outlook.
Designing public spending and tax policies under a holistic approach that takes into account the subsequent effects on other macroeconomic variables such as growth, domestic savings and inflation, as well as the budget balance will contribute to furthering the coordination of monetary policy and fiscal policy, and enhance macroeconomic stability and price stability as well.
In March, consumer prices were up 1.02 percent and annual inflation increased by 1.16 points to 11.29 percent.
As stated in the summary of the MPC meeting in March, annual food inflation was the key driver of the rising consumer inflation in this period due, among others, to the low base effect from a year earlier.
On the other hand, energy prices inched down amid lower international oil prices.
Services inflation remained high while core goods saw widespread price hikes due to the lagged effect of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation.
Thus, core inflation indicators remained on the rise.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.93 percent in March, bringing annual inflation up by 3.81 points to 12.53 percent in this subcategory.
This upsurge was mostly attributed to higher unprocessed food prices, particularly for fresh fruits, and the low base effect.
On the processed food front, prices continued to rise rapidly month-on-month due to exchange rates, causing annual processed food inflation to hit 7.28 percent.
Leading indicators for April signal that annual food inflation will increase sharply on the back of the base effect from unprocessed food.
Energy prices edged down by 0.95 percent amid lower international oil prices in March.
Accordingly, after having surged since June 2016, annual energy inflation declined to 12.19 percent in this period.
Prices of services rose by 0.63 percent while annual services inflation inched up by 0.27 points to 8.64 percent in March.
Annual inflation was up in transport and other services but remained flat in other subcategories.
Prices of transport services were driven higher by the lagged effects of rising fuel prices.
Across other services, both exchange rates and the high level of headline inflation pushed inflation higher in subcategories such as maintenance and repair, healthcare and education.
Rent inflation remained elevated.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.63 points to 10.46 percent in March.
The lagged spillovers of the depreciating Turkish lira continued to weigh on all 1 subcategories.
Clothing and footwear prices soared much faster than historical averages in March.
Prices of durable goods were up mainly because of the exchange rate-stricken auto industry.
In this period, prices of core goods excluding clothing and durables increased dramatically due to the exchange rate pass-through.
In summary, cost-push pressures and the volatility in food prices in recent months have led to a sharp increase in inflation.
Although the recent improvement in the risk appetite contains some of the upside pressures from cost factors, current elevated levels of inflation pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Data for the fourth quarter of 2016 confirmed the conjecture that the third-quarter economic slowdown was transitory.
In this period, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 3.8 percent quarter-on-quarter and 3.5 percent year-on-year.
Excluding the offset work day losses of the third quarter, the fourth quarter was marked by a moderate growth.
The TURKSTAT’s upward revisions to the first three quarters of 2016 showed that the level of economic activity was much higher than anticipated.
Hence, the economy grew by 2.9 percent in 2016, a rate much lower than past years’ averages.
Annual growth was driven by domestic demand in the last quarter of 2016.
Private spending was up both annually and quarterly thanks to the demand brought forward by automobile tax adjustments, eased macroprudential measures and better financial conditions.
Investments, particularly machinery and equipment investments, were relatively weak in this period.
With exports accelerating in the last quarter, net external demand provided considerably higher contribution to quarterly growth and a slightly better contribution to annual growth compared to the first nine months of 2016.
The first-quarter data for 2017 hint at diminishing recovery in economic activity in the first quarter.
Following a robust increase in January, industrial production contracted in February.
Rapid depreciation of the Turkish lira at the start of the quarter, uncertainties led by volatile financial markets and the leap in inflation are projected to dampen consumption and investment spending.
Although tax incentives stimulate the demand for houses, furniture and home appliances, the recovery in domestic demand fails to spread across all sectors.
Indicators for March and April signal for a stronger economic activity and labor market.
In brief, the mild recovery in the underlying trend of economic activity continues, which is enhanced by supportive incentives and measures.
Despite a partial recovery in domestic demand, net external demand spurs growth with robust increases in exports of goods that spill over into all sectors.
The growing demand from the European Union economies, normalizing relations with neighboring countries, the course of the real exchange rate, and Turkey’s market- shifting flexibility abroad continues to stimulate exports.
Increases in exports of goods translate into a decelerated deterioration in the current account deficit and 2 improvement in core current account deficit indicators.
In addition to the expected partial recovery in tourism, the robust course of exports of goods is expected to contribute positively to the current account.
The worsening trend in the labor market that began in May 2016 came to a halt in January 2017.
In this period, non-farm employment recorded an uptick particularly with the contribution from the services sector.
Meanwhile, leading indicators, such as new job vacancies, the PMI employment index and the expectations for the number of employees in services and construction for March and April suggest a recovery in the employment outlook.
Amid the mild rebound in economic activity and the announced employment incentive packages, the partial improvement in unemployment rates is expected to continue.
In sum, the recently released data indicate a gradual recovery in the economic activity.
Domestic demand conditions display a moderate improvement and demand from the European Union economies continues to contribute positively to exports.
With the supportive measures and incentives provided recently, the economic activity is expected to gain further pace in the forthcoming period.
Financial market impact of expectations about post-election US economic policies has started to wane since early 2017.
Compared to the previous reporting period, indicators of economic activity point at a stronger global growth in 2017, owing especially to advanced economies.
However, uncertainties over the Brexit process and blurred prospects for post-electoral economic policies in the US keep downside risks to global growth brisk.
As of the first quarter of 2017, the upward trend in advanced economies’ long-term bond yields which started in November came to a halt, and portfolio flows to bond and stock markets of emerging economies resumed thanks to abated uncertainties over the Fed policy accompanied by optimistic expectations in financial markets.
Although there is a slight recovery in recent global financial conditions, the pace of the Fed’s monetary tightening cycle will be the determining factor on the direction and volume of portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Despite the relative improvement in global financial conditions, domestic financial conditions tightened slightly in the first quarter of 2017 due to the partly persistent volatility in the exchange rate market and the tightening in monetary policy.
On the other hand, the Turkish lira has recently diverged positively from other emerging economy currencies and offset past losses to some extent.
Moreover, macroprudential policies supporting the financial system, public incentives and public credit guarantees allowed credit conditions to continue to recover.
The 3 recovery in consumer loans and Turkish lira denominated commercial loans observed in the first quarter of 2017 is monitored closely with regard to its effects on aggregate demand and economic activity.
Downside risks to economic activity have recently abated.
The growth outlook for 2017 is expected to be more favorable compared to 2016 which was subject to numerous concurrent adverse shocks.
The relative stability in tourism revenues, the strengthened confidence channel, the favorable effect of the cumulative exchange rate depreciation on net exports, and the normalization of commercial relations with Russia will all contribute to growth.
Moreover, measures and incentives to stimulate consumption and investment expenditures, fading perceptions of uncertainty and the improvement in the tightness of financial conditions will also enhance growth.
Accordingly, economic activity is expected to strengthen as of the second quarter of the year.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments constitute downside risks to growth in 2017 as well as it has recently.
Consumer inflation has surged since November 2016 and rose above the upper band of January forecasts.
The upward trend in inflation was largely driven by the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the rise in import prices in addition to the increase in food prices.
The rapid depreciation in the Turkish lira spread across the consumer price index, particularly to energy and durable goods items.
The Committee evaluated medium-term projections to be presented in the April Inflation Report in the meeting.
Year-end inflation forecasts for 2017 and 2018 were revised upwards by 0.5 and 0.4 points, respectively, compared to the 2017 January Inflation Report.
Given a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, inflation is estimated to converge gradually to the 5-percent target.
Accordingly, inflation is likely to be 8.5 percent at end-2017, and stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term after falling to 6.4 percent in 2018.
As also indicated in the previous Report, due to the base effects stemming from the prices of unprocessed food, tobacco and clothing as well as temporary tax reductions, consumer inflation will fluctuate throughout 2017.
Inflation is expected to reach the highest levels in April- May particularly due to the base effect from unprocessed food and the lagged effects of the exchange rate, and then to fall thereafter as the impact of last year’s price increases in energy, alcohol-tobacco products and food gradually diminishes.
The tight monetary stance will support the disinflation process.
Aggregate demand conditions on which medium-term inflation forecasts are based, continue to have a disinflationary effect albeit at a more limited extent in comparison with the January Report.
The upward revision in last year’s national income data and the acceleration in credit indicate that the recovery in economic activity might be stronger than expected.
However high levels of unemployment rates suggest that the demand-side risks on inflation are balanced.
The effects on 4 aggregate demand conditions, of production and employment incentives and measures to boost the credit market, will be closely monitored in the upcoming period.
to food inflation – another major determinant of inflation forecasts – are considered to be on the upside.
Due to the recovery in the exports of food products and the impact of the exchange rate developments, food inflation might exceed current projections, which are based on the assumption that measures taken by the Food Committee will considerably balance the upside risks to food prices.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to strengthen the monetary tightening in order to contain the deterioration in the inflation outlook, and raised the Late Liquidity Window lending rate from 11.75 percent to 12.25 percent in its April meeting.
The CBRT formulates monetary policy in consideration of the medium-term inflation outlook, thus, focuses on the developments in the underlying trend of inflation rather than the anticipated fluctuations in inflation driven by the base effects during the course of the year.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework and have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
In recent years, sustained fiscal discipline has been one of key factors in lowering the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks.
Countercyclical fiscal policy has been implemented recently, thanks to the space provided by fiscal discipline.
Structural measures, which would improve the potential to implement countercyclical fiscal policy, will contribute to the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy, and thus support macroeconomic stability.
In May, consumer prices were up 0.45 percent and annual inflation fell 0.15 points to 11.72 percent.
Food inflation remained on the rise while energy inflation continued to slow.
The lagged effects of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation continued to weigh upon core goods whereas annual core goods inflation declined due to the methodology change to clothing prices.
Adjusted for these transient effects, the improvement in underlying inflation remained limited in this period.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.28 points to 16.91 percent in May largely due to the annual fresh fruits and vegetables inflation that hit 48 percent.
Price hikes were also common across food excluding fresh fruits and vegetables, notably in red meat.
Leading indicators for June signal that annual food inflation will decrease on the back of the base effect from unprocessed food.
Annual energy inflation fell further in May due to exchange rates and lower oil prices, to 8.72 percent.
Leading indicators suggest that annual energy inflation has continued to slow in June.
Prices of services rose by 0.93 percent while annual services inflation edged up by 0.19 points to 9.06 percent in May.
Factors affecting services inflation included cost increases driven by exchange rates and food prices and indexation to headline inflation.
Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.31 points to 9.71 percent in May, mainly due to the temporary impact of the methodology change to weight system of the clothing category.
In non-clothing categories, annual inflation continued to climb because of the lagged spillovers of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation.
More specifically, prices soared at a much faster rate than historical averages across core goods excluding clothing and durables.
All in all, inflation remains high.
Despite recent cost developments and the expected partial improvement in food prices, risks to the pricing behavior still prevail.
In the first quarter, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 5.0 percent year- on-year and 1.4 percent quarter-on-quarter, thus indicating economic activity picked up further.
Key drivers of quarterly growth were, in sequence, exports, construction investments and public consumption.
Machinery and equipment investments remained sluggish, while private consumption slowed due to demand being brought forward.
The high contribution from net exports to quarterly growth translates into a growth composition buoying up the current account balance.
Leading indicators hint at a strengthening economic recovery in the second quarter.
April’s industrial production and May PMI data signaled a more robust increase for the second quarter than in the previous one.
Not only the manufacturing industry, but also services, retail trade and construction saw strengthening activity recently.
Accordingly, economic recovery appears to be more widespread across sectors.
A similar outlook is also visible in demand indicators.
Both consumer confidence and investment tendency have improved recently.
The consumer demand for categories subject to incentives remains strong while investments signal some pickup after the subdued course in the first quarter.
Domestic demand is likely to make more contribution to growth in the second quarter.
Domestic demand keeps recovering while net external demand spurs growth amid robust increases in exports of goods that spill over into a wide range of sectors and destinations.
The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU, and Turkey’s flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports.
Increases in exports of goods slow down the deterioration of the current account deficit and help improve core current account deficit indicators.
Strong course of exports of goods are expected to continue to contribute positively to the current account.
The labor market picked up in March for the second month in a row.
In this period, non-farm employment recorded an uptick, particularly in construction and industrial sectors.
Although economic recovery has yet to fully seep through to the labor market in the first quarter, March data and leading indicators show a more upbeat picture for the second quarter.
With a more solid economic rebound, employment gains will likely be more notable in the upcoming period while unemployment rates may decline further.
In sum, recent data indicate a strengthening recovery in economic activity.
Domestic demand has improved and the growing EU demand continues to contribute positively to exports.
Economic activity is expected to strengthen further amid supportive incentives and measures.
The Committee assesses that implementing structural reforms would augment potential growth significantly.
Global economic activity continues to improve.
This improvement, which appears simultaneously in advanced and emerging economies, accompany the upward revision in global growth forecasts, and they both underpin the optimism in global markets.
Inflation still hovers low despite the favorable growth outlook, which leads advanced economies to sustain the accommodative monetary policy stance.
In addition, due to the perceptions for a milder monetary tightening by the Fed, global risk appetite hit historically high levels, and emerging economies saw accelerated portfolio inflows as of March 2017.
Despite the recovery in global economic activity, energy prices, which have recently been on the decline, lend the inflation prospects and current account balance a helping hand.
The recent favorable outlook notwithstanding, downside risks to global economy still reside.
Blurred process of the Fed’s balance sheet downsizing, the political climate in Europe, the course of Brexit talks and geopolitical developments are the factors that may alter the risk sentiment in a short time.
Thanks also to the tight monetary policy stance, Turkey still diverges positively from other emerging economies in the exchange rate and risk premium indicators.
Backed by macroprudential policies and credit guarantee support, retail loans and TL- denominated business loans has grown considerably since the start of the year.
In the banking sector, as the supply-side effects step in, the fast loan growth is expected to be soon replaced by a milder outlook.
The improvement in credits is monitored closely with regard to the extent of their impact on the aggregate demand and economic activity.
Recently-released indicators confirm that downside risks to economic activity have abated and the economic rebound will prove more robust as of the second quarter of the year.
Thus, growth prospects for 2017 recorded a progress.
Tourism revenues stabilized relatively, the cumulative depreciation affected net exports positively and trade relations with Russia started to normalize, which all underpin growth.
What is more, the measures and incentive packages to boost consumption and investment expenditures, reduced uncertainty and improved financial conditions contribute to growth.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017, as it has recently.
The recent stable course of the Turkish lira and the falling commodity prices notwithstanding, cumulative effects of cost factors on inflation lingers.
The correction in food prices has not reached desired levels yet, thus requires a cautious stance regarding the permanence of the sizeable decreases expected in June and July to result from the base effect in the group’s inflation.
Moreover, temporary tax reductions in white goods and furniture sectors to be taken back in October accompanied by the effects of the methodological changes in the clothing group are 3 also noted as the developments envisaged to cause fluctuations in inflation in the short term.
Additionally, the Committee evaluated that as the improvement in economic activity gets stronger, demand conditions will offer less support to the disinflation process.
In short, although recent improvements in cost factors and expected partial correction in food prices will contribute to disinflation, current elevated levels of inflation pose risks to the pricing behavior.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain the tight stance of monetary policy at the June Meeting, and kept the lending rate at 12.25 percent under the Late Liquidity Window.
The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework and have an adverse effect on the medium- term inflation outlook.
Thanks to the room for maneuver provided by fiscal discipline, stabilizing fiscal policy could have been implemented recently.
In June, consumer prices were down 0.27 percent and annual inflation decreased by 0.82 points to 10.90 percent.
Food inflation dropped on the back of fresh fruits and vegetables while annual energy inflation continued to decelerate.
The lagged effects of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation continued to weigh upon core goods whereas annual core goods inflation declined due to prices of durable goods.
There is an improvement in underlying inflation in this period, even after adjusting for the transient effects of the methodology change in the clothing price index.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages fell by 2.57 points to 14.34 percent in June due to the reduction in annual fresh fruits and vegetables inflation coming from the base effect.
On the other hand, annual inflation remained on the rise across food excluding fresh fruits and vegetables, with red meat prices recording large increases.
Leading indicators for July signal that annual food inflation will continue to decrease owing to the base effect from unprocessed food.
Annual energy inflation fell further in June amid a more favorable exchange rate and oil price outlook.
Yet, recent developments may lead to a slight pickup in July’s energy inflation.
Prices of services rose by 0.53 percent while annual services inflation inched up by 0.12 points to 9.18 percent in June amid factors such as rising transport prices driven by the lagged effects of increased fuel prices, and higher catering prices due to the indirect effects of increased food inflation, particularly in red meat.
In addition to cost increases driven by exchange rates, fuel prices and food prices, factors affecting services inflation also include indexation to headline inflation.
Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.51 points to 9.20 percent in June on the back of durable goods prices due to recent outlook in Turkish lira.
Meanwhile, annual clothing inflation remained relatively flat in this period.
Across core goods excluding clothing and durables, monthly price hikes have abated yet annual inflation remained high because of the lagged spillovers of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation.
In sum, inflation edged down but still remains high.
Despite the disinflationary impact of recent cost developments and a likely partial correction in food prices, the high inflation remains a risk to the pricing behavior.
Recently released data indicate an ongoing recovery in the economic activity.
An evaluation of April and May industrial production figures jointly suggests a stronger quarter-on-quarter increase in the second quarter.
Survey indicators of June show that this outlook will be maintained.
Domestic demand keeps recovering while net external demand spurs growth amid increases in exports of goods that spill over into a wide range of sectors.
The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU, the course of the real exchange rate and Turkey’s flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports.
In addition to the expected partial recovery in tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the current account balance.
The uptick in the labor market, which started in February and March, grew more apparent in April period.
Supported by rising employment in non-farm sectors, unemployment rate records a decline.
Leading indicators hint at a further decrease in unemployment rate amid the economic recovery.
In sum, recent data indicate that the economic activity will maintain its strength due to the supportive measures and incentives provided recently.
Domestic demand conditions have improved and demand from the European Union economies continues to contribute positively to exports.
The rebound in economic activity will bear favorable effects on the labor market in the upcoming period as well.
The mild recovery in global economic activity became more pronounced particularly due to advanced economies in the first quarter of 2017.
The considerable fall in volatility in global financial markets and the increased the risk appetite reinforces the support of global financial conditions on economic activity.
Moreover, the optimistic outlook in the consumer and the real sector confidence indices and the favorable course of some commodity prices, chiefly oil, also improve expectations regarding global economic activity.
The favorable global growth outlook and the 2 resulting fall in unemployment notwithstanding, the normalization process in monetary policies of advanced economies is believed to prove mild due to the absence of an apparent inflationist pressure related to wage increases.
These factors keep portfolio inflows to emerging economies brisk including Turkey.
Despite the current favorable outlook in global economic activity, downside risks to global economy reside as well.
In particular, should the normalization process of the Fed’s policy-rate increase and the balance sheet downsizing prove faster than expected, the high risk appetite and low volatility cycle in financial markets may reverse.
That may generate fluctuations in prices of securities in advanced economies and weaken the growth trend.
Moreover, fading risk appetite may cause fluctuations in portfolio flows to emerging economies as well.
In addition to these, the course of Brexit talks and effects of the blurred global economic policies like foreign trade protectionism that is on the agenda of many countries, particularly the US, are monitored closely.
In line with the positive course of the global financial markets, domestic financial conditions also proved more supportive of economic activity in the second quarter.
This was driven by macroprudential policies, public measures and incentives and acceleration of the credits secured by the Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF), for which the limits were raised and terms of use were facilitated as of March.
On the other hand, owing to strong capital inflows to especially the GDDS markets as of March, the share of foreign investors within the GDDS stock increased, and the Treasury increased foreign borrowing due to bulky foreign demand, which offered domestic banks a considerable room on the supply side.
As the upper limit defined in credits secured by the CGF is near and as the supply-side effects have recently stepped in the banking sector, credit growth which lost pace starting from June is expected to be balanced at milder levels as of the second half of the year.
The improvement in credits in the first half of the year is monitored closely with regard to the extent of their impact on the aggregate demand and economic activity.
Recently-released indicators confirm the previous view that downside risks to economic activity have abated and the economic recovery will prove more robust as of the second quarter of the year.
Signals for a wider sectoral spillover of the pickup in economic activity led by exporting sectors compared to the previous periods are important to a stable recovery in growth.
The gradual improvement in tourism revenues, the strengthened confidence channel, the positive effect of the cumulative depreciation on net exports and the normalization of commercial relations with Russia support growth.
Moreover, the measures and incentive packages to boost consumption and investment expenditures, reduced uncertainty and improved financial conditions will continue to spur growth.
The improvement in employment and the fall in unemployment rate on the back of the ongoing recovery constitute a ground for the maintenance of this trend and increased contribution of domestic demand to growth.
Investment is envisaged to exhibit a gradual improvement as uncertainties wane and the climate of confidence grows stronger.
The favorable effects of the monetary tightening on inflation have become visible.
Consumer inflation receded following on the back of falling oil prices and the recent stable course of the Turkish lira and remained broadly consistent with the forecasts in the April Inflation Report.
The medium-term inflation outlook seems to have improved since the previous Reporting period, and the recovery in underlying inflation is expected to continue gradually.
However, considering that the rigidity in expectations and the pricing behavior resides to a great extent, the improvement in the core inflation outlook, which is not yet deemed satisfactory, requires a tight monetary policy stance.
The Committee evaluated medium-term projections to be presented in the July Inflation Report in the meeting.
Accordingly, year-end inflation forecast was revised upwards by 0.2 points for 2017, while it was kept unchanged for 2018 compared to the 2017 April Inflation Report.
Accordingly, inflation is likely to be 8.7 percent at end-2017, and stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term after falling to 6.4 percent in 2018.
Although the highest inflation levels of the year are left behind, inflation is likely to follow a fluctuating course in the second half.
The correction in food prices is yet to be at a favored level, which necessitates a cautious evaluation of how permanent the recent decline in the group’s inflation due to the base effects will be.
Furthermore, temporary tax reductions in white goods and the furniture sector to be taken back in October as well as the effects driven by methodological changes stand out as factors that will lead to fluctuations in inflation in the short term and temporary increases in core inflation.
The inflation outlook is projected to recover starting from the last month of the year, and become more evident in the early months of 2018.
Against this background, the Committee decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance in its July meeting and kept the Late Liquidity Window lending rate constant at 12.25 percent.
The CBRT formulates monetary policy by taking the medium-term inflation into account, thus focusing on the developments in underlying inflation rather than the anticipated fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course of the year.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and further monetary tightening will be delivered if needed.
The room provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of expansionary fiscal policy.
Structural measures to provide room for counter-cyclical fiscal policies will enhance the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy, and improve macroeconomic stability.
In August, consumer prices were up 0.52 percent and annual inflation rose by 0.89 points to 10.68 percent.
Inflation recorded a spike in food and energy and remained elevated in services.
Clothing and durable goods sent inflation soaring across core goods, pushing the annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators higher.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.9 points to 11.97 percent in August due to both a negative base effect from unprocessed food prices and widespread upsurges of processed food prices.
Leading indicators for September signal that annual food inflation will remain on the rise mainly due to the base effect from unprocessed food.
Energy prices jumped by 2.03 percent in August amid price developments in oil and other inputs.
Thus, having been on an upward track for the last two months, annual energy inflation amounted to 10.54 percent.
Prices of services rose by 0.73 percent while annual services inflation remained high at a virtually unchanged 9.40 percent in August.
In this period, inflation was higher across catering and accommodation services due to rising food and beverage prices as well as the recovering tourism.
Other drivers of high services inflation include soaring costs and indexation to headline inflation.
In fact, prices of educational services, which are largely inflation-indexed, surged by 2.79 percent, driving annual inflation up to 10.30 percent in this subcategory.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.22 points to 11.08 percent in August.
Clothing and durable goods prices drove annual inflation higher amid the Turkish lira’s slide against the euro and the strong economic activity.
With the methodology change for clothing factored in as well, inflation seems to be on the rise for the last two months.
Among durable goods, price hikes were more prevalent in furniture, automobiles and home appliances, yet monthly price increases continued to slow across core goods excluding clothing and durable goods.
Indicators for September hint at continued uptrend in core goods inflation, albeit mainly due to the methodology change in the weight system for the clothing category.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation indicators pose risks to the pricing behavior.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew annually 5.1 percent and quarterly 2.1 percent in the second quarter of 2017.
Economic activity was thus stronger than in the first quarter.
The upward revisions to the data of previous periods were also considered as signs of an even stronger economic activity leading to the conclusion that the disinflationary contribution of demand conditions has reduced significantly as of the second quarter.
The main driver of quarterly growth in this period was domestic demand, particularly construction investments and private consumption.
Net exports made a negative contribution to quarterly growth due to the domestic demand-led upswing in imports and weaker exports, yet continued to boost annual growth.
Leading indicators suggest that economic activity remained robust in the third quarter.
July’s industrial production data and the PMI data for August signal stronger growth in the third quarter compared to the previous one.
A similar outlook is also evident in demand indicators.
The consumer demand for categories subject to incentives remains robust while investments edged up in the second quarter after a subdued first quarter.
Domestic demand is likely to make more contribution to growth in the third quarter.
Given the strengthening economy as well as the calendar and base effects, the Committee expects a sizable annual growth for the third quarter.
Domestic demand keeps recovering while net external demand spurs growth thanks to increases in exports of goods that spill over into a wide range of sectors.
The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly for the EU and Turkey’s flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports.
The uptick in the labor market, which started in February and March, continued in June period.
In this period, nonfarm employment was up on account of services.
Leading indicators signal further gradual decreases in unemployment rates over the upcoming period amid economic recovery.
In short, recently released data indicate that the recovery in economic activity has gained strength.
Domestic demand conditions keep improving and demand from the European Union economies continues to contribute positively to exports.
The 2 Committee assesses that the implementation of the structural reforms would contribute to potential growth significantly.
Global economic activity has recently settled on a trend of recovery due both to advanced and emerging economies.
The optimistic outlook in the consumer and the real sector confidence indices, ongoing favorable conditions in global financing and stabilizing commodity prices also underpin the positive outlook in global economic activity.
Leading indicators for the third quarter hint at a better growth performance than the second quarter, which lead to upward revisions in the year-end growth projections for 2017.
While communications by advanced economy central banks regarding the normalization of monetary policies occasionally cause short-term market volatility, the monetary policy normalization process has remained moderate because of still low global inflation rates.
The elevated risk appetite and the subsided volatility in global financial markets along with favorable figures regarding global growth, keep portfolio inflows to emerging economies brisk including Turkey.
Moreover, fading risk appetite also led by geopolitical developments may cause fluctuations in portfolio flows to emerging economies as well.
In line with the upbeat mood in global financial markets, domestic financial conditions also continued to be supportive of economic activity in the third quarter.
This was driven by macroprudential policies, public measures and incentives, as well as the credits secured by the Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF), which improved overall credit conditions.
As the upper limit defined in credits secured by the CGF becomes near and the supply-side effects have recently stepped in the banking sector, credit growth is balancing at milder levels, approaching past averages in the third quarter.
The strong acceleration in credits in the first half of the year is monitored closely with regard to the extent of its impact on the aggregate demand and economic activity.
Recently-released indicators confirm the previous view that downside risks to economic activity have abated and the economic recovery will prove more robust starting from the second quarter of the year.
Third-quarter indicators reveal an ongoing robust economic activity.
Exports remain buoyant despite some deceleration, and investments signal for recovery on the back of the sustained improvement in domestic demand.
Annual growth in the third quarter is likely to prove quite high due to the calendar and base effects.
The remainder of the year is 3 anticipated to witness a milder trend in economic activity due to the fading effects of the CGF support on growth and the withdrawal of the tax incentives on consumption expenditures.
Assessing the data on economic activity and the labor market jointly suggests a subsided disinflationary support from demand conditions in some sectors.
Base effects in the food group, temporary tax reductions in white goods and the furniture sector that will be taken back in October as well as the methodological changes stand out as factors that will lead to fluctuations in inflation in the short term and temporary increases in core inflation.
The inflation outlook is projected to improve gradually starting from the last months of the year, yet the pace and quality of this improvement will be monitored closely.
Against this background, the Committee decided to maintain the tight stance of monetary policy in its September meeting and kept the Late Liquidity Window lending rate constant at 12.25 percent.
In September, consumer prices were up 0.65 percent and annual inflation rose by 0.52 points to 11.20 percent.
Annual inflation recorded a decline in the energy group due to the base effect, but increased in other subgroups.
Food inflation increased due to the negative base effect in the unprocessed food group coupled with the spike in the processed food prices.
Core goods and services groups witnessed overall price hikes, while the rise in the clothing group is mainly attributed to the methodological change in the weighting system.
These developments pushed both the annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators higher.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 0.53 points to 12.50 percent in September.
Both unprocessed and processed food prices recorded higher annual inflation rates.
While this outlook on unprocessed food inflation was triggered by the base effect, the red meat prices are decreasing amid the measures in effect and seasonally-adjusted unprocessed food prices have been on the decline for the last three months.
Leading indicators for October hint at a sustained downtrend in unprocessed food prices.
On the energy front, prices jumped in September amid price developments in oil and other inputs, and this trend continued in October.
Prices of services rose by 1.04 percent and the annual services inflation reached 9.55 percent in September.
Price hikes spread across subgroups, and particularly striking were those in accommodation services and rent.
Largely indexed to headline inflation, prices of educational services increased at a high rate in September as in August.
Climbing inflation in services was driven both by increased costs and indexation to past inflation besides the robust course of economic activity.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.62 points to 12.70 percent in September.
All subgroups, chiefly the clothing group saw higher annual inflation in this period.
The recent upward course of core goods inflation was led by the lagged effects of the exchange rate, the strong course of economic activity and the clothing-driven 1 methodological effects.
The change in the weighting structure in clothing was mostly manifested itself in this period and accounted for nearly half of the rise in annual inflation in core indicators.
Among durable goods, price hikes were more prevalent in automobiles and home appliances, and monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum.
Indicators for October hint at an ongoing uptrend in core goods inflation.
The termination of the temporary tax reductions in white goods and furniture sector will also have a role in this uptrend.
In addition, the weight update for clothing prices may still put upward pressure in October, albeit to a lesser degree.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and the developments on core inflation outlook continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Recently released data indicate a strong economic activity.
July-August data on industrial production and September’s survey indicators suggest that industrial activity remains strong yet somewhat slower than in the second quarter.
As growth becomes more widespread across sectors, indicators for services and trade have also recorded substantial gains; the recovery in the tourism sector helped boost the economic activity, as well.
Private consumption props up growth, while machinery and equipment investments have been increasingly displaying signs of recovery following a long spell of weak growth.
Domestic demand is expected to provide added support to growth in the third quarter.
The Committee reiterated that annual growth will be much faster in the third quarter owing to strengthening economic activity as well as calendar and base effects.
Despite that a slight deterioration in the current account deficit is expected in the next few months due to the recovery in domestic demand and base effects, the strong recovery in tourism and the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the current account balance.
The labor market improvement halted in July.
In this period, construction employment increased whereas employment in industry and service sectors dropped compared to the previous period.
Thus, despite the strong economy-wide growth, the labor market displayed only a partial recovery.
Survey data suggest that the weak July outlook was only temporary.
Still, the Committee noted that employment gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the strong upward trend in the labor force participation rate.
In short, economic activity was robust in the third quarter.
Domestic demand conditions keep improving and the improving external demand, primarily from European Union economies, continues to contribute positively to exports.
The 2 Committee assesses that the implementation of structural reforms would contribute to potential growth significantly.
The global economic upturn is expected to continue in the rest of 2017 and throughout 2018.
Although financial market volatility slightly increased in the third quarter, global financial conditions remain accommodative as the risk appetite is still strong.
Despite the third quarter’s higher crude oil prices driven by the benign global growth outlook, the OPEC output cut and the hurricanes that hit the US oil production, demand and supply-side factors specific to the oil market are containing the upward pressures on energy prices.
On the other hand, risks related to other commodity prices are on the upside due to the global growth outlook.
The primary downside risk to the global economic outlook is the uncertainty surrounding monetary policy normalization across advanced economies.
The communication after the September meeting reinforced financial market expectations that the Fed will stick to its previously announced path of normalization.
The Fed started reducing the size of its balance sheet in October.
If the impending balance sheet downsizing of the Fed and other major central banks is introduced faster than expected, the high risk appetite and low volatility cycle in financial markets may be reversed.
In addition to these uncertainties regarding global economic policies, the lack of a clear-cut Brexit strategy, the tendency towards more inward-oriented policies in European economies and the ongoing geopolitical turmoil in Asia and the Middle East stand out as other upcoming downside risks to financial markets and global growth.
The fact that the size of private sector debt has reached high levels across some emerging economies, with China in the lead, might aggravate the impact of the risks related to financial markets.
The favorable global economic outlook and trade volume as well as the ongoing global risk appetite prompted an upturn in portfolio flows toward emerging economies recently, but heightened geopolitical risks caused portfolio investments to lose momentum in Turkey.
Turkey’s portfolio inflows have been more concentrated in government bonds since September whereas flows to the stock market remained volatile and weak.
The volatility in the foreign exchange market triggered a rise in long-term inflation compensation.
Despite these developments, financial conditions remained mostly accommodative in the third quarter.
Loan growth balanced at historical levels in the third quarter, as the loans guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund almost reached the pre-determined upper limit.
The strong acceleration of credit growth in the first half of the year and its phase-out in the second half are monitored closely with regard to their impact on aggregate demand and economic activity.
The third quarter’s economic activity and aggregate demand were mostly in line with the predictions of the previous Report.
After the third quarter, domestic 3 demand might see some slowdown due to the reduced support of the additional credit boost to growth and the termination of tax incentives for durable goods, and the economy is expected to move towards its underlying trend.
Both the subsiding effect of the accommodative policies of 2017 and the fiscal measures announced in the recent Medium Term Program (MTP) are monitored closely with respect to their effect on economic activity.
The continued recovery in tourism, the improving global growth outlook and the favorable course of the real exchange rate are expected to contribute further to growth and the current account balance in the coming months through the export channel.
The improving perceptions regarding uncertainty will continue to bolster investment in the next quarter, as in the third quarter.
As the recovery becomes widespread, it is expected that favorable tendency will take place in employment and investment, upholding economic growth.
Against this background, uncertainties over monetary policies of major central banks, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments remain key to economic activity.
Exchange rate volatility that may arise from such factors poses a downside risk to the timing and strength of the support that financial conditions could provide to the economic activity.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term projections to be presented in the final Inflation Report of the year.
Accordingly, year-end inflation forecast was revised upwards by 1.1 points for 2017, and 0.6 points for 2018, compared to the 2017 July Inflation Report.
Accordingly, inflation is likely to be 9.8 percent at end-2017, and stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term after falling to 7 percent by the end of 2018.
Following the July Inflation Report, the rise in commodity prices, particularly for oil and metals, and exchange rate changes drove inflation higher through the cost channel, causing core inflation indicators to exceed forecasts.
Inflation is expected to remain high in October and November before coming down markedly to a still elevated level in December amid base effects.
Base effects from food prices, the termination of temporary tax cuts for home appliances and furniture in October and the methodology change for clothing are the factors that will cause inflation to fluctuate in the short term and core inflation to rise briefly.
The inflation outlook is expected to improve gradually from December onwards.
The current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation indicators continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior.
These risks and the high levels of inflation expectations might dampen the expected improvement in the inflation outlook from December through the first months of 2018.
The fact that inflation expectations and the pricing behavior show no sign of improvement jeopardizes the inflation outlook.
All these developments necessitate the maintaining of the tight monetary policy stance.
Against this background, the Committee decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance in its October meeting and kept the Late Liquidity Window lending rate constant at 12.25 percent.
The Committee strengthened gradually the caution level of its monetary stance with the communication conducted in September and October.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets.
Accordingly, the monetary policy will aim to bring inflation down to 7 percent at end-2018 before gradually falling to 5 percent.
Consequently, with the current reading of the data, this stance requires that the tight monetary policy be preserved until a convincing fall in the trend of inflation is reached.
Inflation expectations, pricing behaviors and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and further monetary tightening will be delivered if needed.
The Committee will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective.
The baseline monetary policy stance is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices and taxes.
In recent years, sustaining fiscal discipline has been one of the key factors in lowering the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks.
The room provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of an expansionary fiscal policy.
In November, consumer prices rose by 1.49 percent and annual inflation increased by 1.08 points to 12.98 percent.
Annual inflation recorded some decline in the services group, but increased in other subgroups.
Food inflation increased due to the unprocessed food group, while the core goods and energy groups witnessed the adverse effects of exchange rate developments.
Against these developments, annual inflation in core indicators increased due to the core goods group, and the underlying trend remained high.
In November, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 3.04 points to 15.78 percent in November.
The rise in annual inflation was largely driven by unprocessed food prices, while processed food prices also continued to rise at higher rates.
Unlike the decline in meat prices, the negative outlook in the vegetables group drove notably upwards the seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices.
Meanwhile, the processed food group saw sustained price increases in cheese and other dairy products.
Leading indicators for December hint at a downtrend in the annual food inflation to be led by unprocessed food prices.
On the energy front, prices soared further in November amid exchange rate developments coupled with the prices of oil and other inputs.
Prices of services inched up by 0.11 percent in November and the annual services inflation has declined for the first time since the start of the year to 9.42 percent.
Monthly price increases accelerated to some extent in rent, and remained mild in other subgroups.
This period was particularly marked by falling prices in transport services as well as package tours under other services.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.74 points and reached 15.05 percent in November.
Annual inflation followed a flat course in the clothing group but increased in other subgroups.
Durable goods saw further monthly price hikes, chiefly in automobiles, white goods and other electrical appliances.
Meanwhile, monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum.
The recent hike in core goods inflation was mostly driven by exchange 1 rate developments and was also stimulated by the robust course of demand conditions.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and the recent cost developments continue to pose risks on expectations and the pricing behavior.
The GDP expanded by 11.1 percent in the third quarter of 2017 in annual terms, and the quarterly growth became 1.2 percent.
In addition to the course of economic activity, this tremendous expansion in annual growth is also attributed to calendar and base effects.
The main driver of annual and quarterly growth proved to be domestic demand led by machinery-equipment investments and private consumption in the third quarter.
The rebound in tourism and the robust course of exports of goods notwithstanding, the sharp increase in gold imports limited the contribution of net exports to annual growth in this period.
Industrial production in October recorded an increase compared both to the previous month and the average of the third quarter.
Activity in sectors subject to tax incentives, chiefly the furniture sector, displayed a slowdown, yet other sectors did not record a loss of momentum.
In fact, survey indicators hint at a sustained uptrend in industrial production in the fourth quarter, albeit with some deceleration.
Indicators for services and trade stood moderate, while the recovery in the tourism sector spurs economic activity further.
Domestic demand conditions keep improving.
In the fourth quarter, private consumption growth is expected to lose some pace following the withdrawal of tax reductions in white goods and furniture.
On the other hand, current indicators show that the third-quarter improvement in machinery-equipment investments continues.
The rise in exports of goods slows the deterioration in the current account deficit and improves the core current account deficit indicators.
In addition to the expected recovery in tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the balance.
The Committee noted that the contribution of net exports to growth will continue in the fourth quarter amid the strong course of exports.
The recovery in the labor market continued in the September period.
Employment increased in services, but receded in industry and construction compared to the previous period.
Survey data suggest that the labor market will improve further in the last quarter.
The Committee highlighted that employment gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the strong uptrend in the labor force participation rate.
Against this background, the unemployment rate is anticipated to decline gradually in the period ahead.
In sum, economic activity recorded a robust growth in the third quarter.
Recently released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength.
Domestic demand conditions keep improving and external demand continues to contribute positively to exports.
Third-quarter data on global growth hint at continued simultaneous recovery in both advanced and emerging economies.
PMI indicators pointing to growth for both markets and the upgraded growth forecasts for 2017 and 2018 compared to the start of 2017 confirm the steady economic rebound across the globe.
Global inflation remains stable.
The primary downside risk to the global economic outlook over the upcoming period is the geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the Korean peninsula and the heightened protectionism clouding international trade negotiations.
Moreover, the imminent passing of the US tax reform bill is considered a positive risk factor for the world economy.
Although oil prices that gained following the OPEC’s recent extension of the output cut decision seem to be the main threat to the steady global inflation, this upward tendency has been contained by the oil production increase in the US.
With the Federal Reserve and the ECB in the lead, major central banks continue to normalize monetary policy.
As the steps towards normalization have been in line with expectations, the market reaction is currently mild.
However, risks to the US interest rates are on the upside.
The imminent tax reform fuels upbeat prospects for the US stock market, yet if this bill leads to a bigger budget deficit, the US Treasury bond rates might increase faster than expected.
The favorable global economic outlook and trade volume as well as the ongoing global risk appetite drive strong portfolio flows into emerging economies.
Having lost some momentum after mid-September, portfolio investments to Turkey have been picking up again recently amid reduced geopolitical risks.
As the loans guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund hit the pre-determined upper limit, the loan growth hovers around historical averages.
The strong acceleration of loan growth in the first half of the year and its phase-out in the second half are monitored closely with regard to their impact on aggregate demand and economic activity.
The third quarter’s economic activity and aggregate demand were mostly in line with predictions.
In the fourth quarter, domestic demand might see some slowdown due to the reduced support of the additional credit boost to growth and the withdrawal of tax incentives for durable goods, and economic growth is expected to move towards its underlying trend.
Exchange rate volatility that may arise from such factors poses a downside risk to the timing and strength of the support that financial conditions could provide to economic activity.
In this regard, the contractionary pressure of the recent Turkish lira depreciation on domestic demand might be partly offset by the export channel.
The rise in commodity prices, particularly for oil and metals, and exchange rate changes have recently driven inflation higher through the cost channel.
Amid robust economic activity, cost pressures had a much larger effect on inflation.
Consumer inflation is expected to come down markedly due to base effects but remain high in December.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to tighten the monetary policy stance.
First of all, as of 22 November 2017, all CBRT funding have been made through the Late Liquidity Window (LON) and the weighted average funding cost is raised by about 25 basis points to 12.25 percent.
Moreover, at its December meeting, the Committee decided to increase the LON lending rate from 12.25 to 12.75 percent.
Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets.
The room 4 provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of an expansionary fiscal policy.
Moreover, continuation of structural steps to reduce inertia and volatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability process and social welfare.
In December, consumer prices rose by 0.69 percent, and annual inflation dropped by 1.06 points to 11.92 percent.
Annual inflation recorded a decline in food and energy groups, but increased in the core goods group.
The fall in food inflation was led by the unprocessed group, while core goods group was largely affected by the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Against these developments, annual inflation in core indicators increased slightly and their underlying trend remained high.
In December, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages receded by 1.99 points to 13.79 percent.
This fall was largely driven by unprocessed food prices due to the base effect accompanied by the sustained decline in red meat prices.
Meanwhile, having soared lately, processed food prices rose moderately in December.
The surge in prices of cheese and other dairy products in recent months turned flat due to the muted rise in raw milk prices.
In line with red meat prices, processed meat products recorded a decline.
Owing to the change in the basis weight in the Bread Communique, processed food prices entail the risk of an upsurge in January.
Nevertheless, leading indicators for January hint at a downtrend in the annual food inflation to be led by the unprocessed food group.
The uptrend in international oil prices weigh on energy prices.
Accordingly, energy prices registered an increase in December, yet the group’s annual inflation declined due to the base effect.
Despite the increase in electricity prices, leading indicators hint at a similar decline in energy inflation due to the base effect in January as well.
Prices of services inched up by 0.43 percent in December and the annual services inflation remained almost unchanged at 9.47 percent.
In this period annual inflation increased in transport services; remained relatively flat in the restaurants-hotels and communications group, but decreased in other groups.
Fuel prices, which surged amid the depreciated Turkish lira coupled with the rise in oil prices, aggravate inflation in transport services.
Meanwhile, the robust course of demand conditions in certain groups and the headline- inflation indexation stiffens the elevated levels in services inflation.
Annual core goods inflation crept up by 0.40 points and reached 15.45 percent in December.
This was led by the prices of durable goods that increased parallel to the soaring prices of automobiles and white goods.
Thus, inflation in durable goods reached 18 percent.
Price increases in other core goods accelerated in tandem with the cumulative exchange rate effects in products with high import component.
The effect of the methodological change in the clothing group continued with a weaker pace.
The rebound in manufacturing in the 1 clothing sector coupled with the improvement in tourism fueled the rise in group’s inflation across the year.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Recently-released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength.
A joint analysis of October and November data suggests sustained growth in industrial production with some deceleration in the fourth quarter.
However, this deceleration stems from the slowing activity in sectors subject to tax incentives, particularly furniture, and other sectors do not register a loss of momentum.
Survey indicators show that this trend is maintained in December as well.
Indicators for services and trade stand moderate, while the recovery in the tourism sector spurs economic activity further.
Domestic demand continues to expand.
The improving growth outlook across the globe, particularly in the EU, rising external demand and Turkey’s flexibility to shift markets abroad continue to stimulate exports.
The improvement in the import demand in tandem with the course of economic activity notwithstanding, the rise in exports of goods slows the deterioration in the core current account deficit indicators.
In addition to the ongoing recovery in tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the current account balance.
The Committee noted that the contribution of net exports to quarterly GDP growth will continue in the fourth quarter owing to the strong course of exports accompanied by the slowing gold imports.
The second and third-quarter recovery in the labor market continued in the October period, confirming that economic activity remains robust.
Employment increased in services and industry, but receded in the construction sector compared to the previous period.
Survey data suggest the rise in employment coupled with the fall in unemployment rates will continue.
In sum, recently released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength.
Domestic demand continues to expand and external demand contributes positively to exports.
Data on global growth hint at continued simultaneous recovery in both advanced and emerging economies.
PMI indicators pointing to growth for both markets and the upgraded growth forecasts, particularly for the euro area, confirm the steady economic rebound across the globe.
Global inflation has been volatile amid changing commodity and oil prices yet remains low, whereas global core inflation remains stable.
The primary downside risks to the global economic outlook over the upcoming period are the geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the Korean peninsula and the heightened 2 protectionism clouding international trade negotiations.
Moreover, the US tax reform is considered a positive risk factor for the world economy.
However, risks to monetary policy tightening are more on the upside.
With the ongoing economic recovery in the US, the Fed demonstrated its commitment to policy normalization.
The strengthening euro area economy increases the possibility of an earlier-than-anticipated tightening of the ECB monetary policy.
Despite the favorable course of the labor market in advanced countries, the limited increase in wages, while limiting price increases, poses an upward risk in terms of inflation in the upcoming period.
Another key factor that might deteriorate the stable global inflation is the recent movements in oil prices.
In 2018, it is estimated that portfolio inflows will continue in the case of sustained economic recovery and a moderate course in monetary policy normalization of advanced economies.
Meanwhile, portfolio investments to Turkey may at times be volatile amid geopolitical risks.
Both global and domestic financial conditions have generally been supportive of economic activity.
Since the December MPC meeting, financial indicators such as exchange rate volatility, market interest rates and risk premium have alleviated thanks to the CBRT policies and the interruption in the negative news flow.
Due to the CBRT’s tighter monetary stance, the downward slope of the yield curve has become more pronounced.
The loan growth that hovers around historical averages as the loans guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund hit the pre-determined upper limit in mid-2017 is monitored closely with regard to its impact on aggregate demand and economic activity.
Domestic demand has slowed slightly due to the reduced support of the additional credit boost to growth and the withdrawal of tax incentives for durable goods, and economic growth has started to move towards its underlying trend as of the fourth quarter of 2017.
The accommodative policies of 2017 will have less of an effect in 2018 while the fiscal measures to be introduced within the context of the Medium Term Program and the tight monetary stance are expected to be the main drivers of loan growth and a normalized economic activity.
Moreover, the smaller yet ongoing Credit Guarantee Fund support will support domestic demand in 2018.
The steady recovery in tourism, the improving global growth outlook and the favorable course of the real exchange rate are expected to contribute further to growth and the current account balance in the coming months through the export channel.
Current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Having pulled annual consumer inflation down in December largely on the back of base effects and weather conditions, food and energy prices might shape consumer prices over the first quarter of 2018, particularly due to upward and downward volatility in unprocessed food prices.
In addition, changes in oil prices put upward pressure on domestic energy prices.
Meanwhile, core goods inflation remains on the rise amid cumulative exchange rate effects, and aggregate demand conditions support this uptrend.
Given also the 3 elevated services inflation, the Committee assesses that there is no significant improvement in the core inflation outlook.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance and kept the Late Liquidity Window (LON) lending rate at 12.75 percent.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement, independent of base effects and temporary factors, and becomes consistent with the targets.
The Committee formulates monetary policy by taking the medium-term inflation into account, thus focusing on the developments in underlying inflation rather than the anticipated fluctuations driven by the base effects during the course of the year.
Inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored, and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
In February, consumer prices rose by 0.73 percent and annual inflation receded by 0.09 points to 10.26 percent.
Annual inflation was down in energy and core goods, but up in food and services.
Energy inflation was pulled down by falling oil prices as well as relatively stable exchange rates.
Annual core goods inflation slowed slightly while food inflation was driven higher by both processed and unprocessed food prices.
Thus, the annual inflation of core indicators recorded a small decrease while their underlying trend remained high.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages was up by 1.51 points to 10.27 percent in February.
Annual unprocessed food inflation accelerated to 6.71 percent, due to rising prices of fresh fruits and vegetables as well as higher milk and red meat prices.
On this account, being adversely affected, annual processed food inflation hit a nine-year high of 13.76 percent.
In this category, prices of cheese and other dairy goods, fats and processed meat recorded sharp gains.
In addition, bread prices that went up due to the adjustment in the Bread Regulation and prices of nonalcoholic beverages that were driven higher by the new Special Consumption Tax (SCT) applied to some beverages put upward pressure on annual processed food inflation.
Energy prices fell by 0.58 percent in February amid sliding international oil prices and moderating exchange rates, and annual inflation dropped to 6.92 percent in this category.
Annual services inflation increased by 0.14 points to 9.37 percent in February, largely due to the subcategory of other services, the inflation of which was pushed up by rising prices of package tours and health services.
Meanwhile, annual inflation was relatively flat in rents, restaurants-hotels and telecommunications, but continued to decline in transport services.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.65 points to 14.93 percent in February.
Annual inflation was down across all subcategories yet remained high.
The rise in annual clothing inflation was prompted by cumulative cost developments and robust aggregate demand conditions.
Prices of durable goods posted a month-on-month increase due to furniture and automobile prices.
Other core goods, on the other hand, saw a lower annual inflation rate thanks to base effects but their prices were up due to home maintenance-repair and medicines.
It should be noted that the remaining impact of the mid-February increase of 15 percent in medicine prices caused by the reference exchange rate will also be felt in March.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior.
Underlying trend indicators display inertia and core inflation remains elevated.
Industrial production continued to grow in the fourth quarter, albeit at a slower rate.
However, this deceleration stems from the slack in sectors subject to tax incentives, particularly furniture, whereas other sectors see no loss of momentum.
Survey indicators hint at strong industrial output across subsectors for January and February.
Indicators for services and trade remain moderate while the tourism rebound bolsters economic growth.
Private consumption growth is expected to lose some pace over the fourth quarter following the expired tax incentives for home appliances and furniture.
On the other hand, current indicators show that machinery-equipment investments have been improving since the third quarter.
The upbeat growth outlook across the globe, particularly in the European Union (EU), rising external demand and Turkey’s flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate exports.
Notwithstanding the recovering import demand aided by the buoyant economy, gains in exports of goods helped slow down the deterioration of the core current-account- deficit indicators.
The uptrend in exports of goods, coupled with the ongoing tourism rebound, will likely contribute further to the current account balance over the upcoming period.
The Committee noted that the contribution of net exports to quarterly GDP growth will increase in the fourth quarter owing to brisk exports accompanied by slowing gold imports.
The second and third-quarter recovery in the labor market continued into the fourth quarter, confirming that economic activity remains strong.
Employment surged in services and construction sectors in this period, but remained constant in the industrial sector compared to the previous period.
Survey data hints at further employment gains and lower unemployment rates for the upcoming period.
The Committee highlighted that employment gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the upswing in labor force participation.
Thus, unemployment rates are expected to decline gradually in the period ahead.
In short, recently released data indicate that economic activity maintains its strength.
Fourth-quarter data of the previous year on global growth signal continued simultaneous recovery in both advanced and emerging economies.
PMI indicators pointing to growth for both markets and the upgraded growth forecasts, particularly for the EU, confirm the steady economic rebound across the globe.
The primary downside risks to the global economic outlook for the upcoming period are the geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the heightened protectionism clouding international trade negotiations.
In fact, the recent US plan to impose extra customs tariffs on imported steel and aluminum might spark more protectionism in foreign trade across the world.
Moreover, the newly passed US tax reform has provided a growth boost to the US and its trading partners, which is considered an upside risk factor for the world economy.
Global inflation may fluctuate amid changes in commodity and oil prices, yet remains low, while global core inflation follows a flat course.
Upside risks to global inflation reside for the 2 period ahead.
Oil prices stand out as a main factor to distort the steady course of global inflation rates.
A second risk factor to stimulate global inflation is the possibility of an upsurge in wages following the fall in unemployment rates in advanced economies.
In fact, following the announcment of the US labor market data in early February, acceleration in inflation proved more likely.
With the Federal Reserve (Fed) and the European Central Bank (ECB) in the lead, major central banks continue to normalize monetary policy.
However, risks to monetary tightening are more on the upside due to the possibility of accelerating inflation.
In fact, higher volatility emerged in global financial markets and, particularly in the US, a decline was witnessed in the stock exchange amid concerns over the possibility of accelerating inflation and faster-than- projected monetary tightening by the Fed following the labor market data in the US.
The stronger growth outlook also for the European Union is likely to cause a sooner-than- expected tightening in the ECB’s monetary policy.
Unless upside surprises occur in inflation in the period ahead, it is considered that the Fed’s and the ECB’s steps towards normalization will be in line with expectations.
The recent sharp movements in the US stock market had more limited impacts on the stock markets of emerging economies with sounder macroeconomic fundamentals compared to the past.
It is estimated that portfolio inflows will continue in the case of sustained economic recovery in emerging economies and a moderate course in monetary policy normalization of advanced economies in 2018 as well.
With the diminishing effect of the macroprudential incentives and the CGF support granted last year in Turkey, credit growth reverted to historical averages.
Meanwhile, underpinned also by the robust domestic demand, loan rates trended upwards.
In 2018, the release of the new CGF-backed tranches is expected to accelerate the extension of credits, particularly for investment purposes.
Financing the new credits, to be extended by banks, through core liabilities and long-term resources is significant.
Effects of growth and composition of credits on aggregate demand and economic activity are monitored closely.
The reduced support of the additional credit boost to growth and the expiry of tax incentives on durable goods have led domestic demand to lose pace and economic growth to move towards its underlying trend as of the fourth quarter of 2017.
In 2018, in addition to the fading effect accommodative policies of 2017, the tight monetary stance and the fiscal measures under the MTP are likely to appear as the main drivers of loan growth and a normalized economic activity.
Meanwhile, the continued support from the CGF, albeit limited, will stand as a factor to stimulate domestic demand in 2018.
Against this background, uncertainties over monetary policies of major central banks, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments remain a key element of economic activity.
Current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior.
The hikes in processed food prices in the last couple of months disclose persisting risks to food inflation.
Producer-driven cost pressures remain brisk.
Costs in energy, particularly electricity, exhibit an uptick.
The upbeat economic activity also acts in the 3 appearance of cost pressures on inflation.
All these developments maintain brisk risks to the core inflation outlook, particularly to the core goods inflation.
Moreover, continuation of structural steps to reduce inertia and volatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability and social welfare.
In March, consumer prices rose by 0.99 percent and annual inflation edged down by 0.03 points to 10.23 percent.
Annual inflation came down in core goods and services, went up in food and energy.
Producer-price-driven cost pressures became stronger relative to February.
The annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators recorded a small decrease, yet remained high.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages was up 0.10 points to 10.37 percent in March.
Moderating amid mild weather, fresh fruits and vegetables inflation pulled unprocessed food inflation down, while milk and red meat prices soared.
These price increases were reflected on processed food prices, as the prices of cheese, other dairy goods, fats and processed meat climbed.
Prices remained on the rise for nonalcoholic beverages that were subject to the adjustment in special consumption tax in January.
Thus, prices across the processed food category continued to post strong month-on-month increases while the annual processed food inflation reached 14.42 percent.
Leading indicators for April point to some deceleration in annual food inflation.
Energy prices increased by 0.32 percent in March and annual energy inflation rose to 8.29 percent, largely due to base effects.
Energy inflation is expected to register a significant surge in April driven by rising electricity tariffs and also fuel prices due to the weakening Turkish lira and higher oil prices.
Given the low base effect from the second quarter of 2017, energy inflation is likely to remain on the rise in the short term.
Annual services inflation dropped by 0.11 points to 9.26 percent in March, mostly due to the subcategories of transport and other services.
Transport inflation decreased on account of intercity passenger transport by road, while other services inflation decreased on account of repair of household appliances and base effects due to package tours.
The current levels of inflation and inflation expectations, price increases across exchange-rate-sensitive items, the food inflation outlook and the robust economic activity lead services inflation to remain high.
Moreover, real unit labor costs driven higher by wage adjustments hinder more positive inflation outlook for the services sector due to its labor-intensive nature.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 1.00 point to 13.93 percent.
Prices of durable goods posted a month-on- month increase due to prices of automobiles and white goods.
In the other core goods category, prices saw large monthly increases due to the lagged exchange rate pass-through effects and the spillovers of the February increase in medicine prices caused by the updated 1 reference exchange rate.
The recent Turkish lira deprecation worsens the outlook for core goods inflation.
In sum, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
Upside movements in import prices, particularly for oil, have increased such risks.
GDP data confirmed our previous assessments that economic activity would remain strong in the fourth quarter of 2017.
The GDP expanded at a quarterly rate of 1.8 percent and an annual rate of 7.3 percent in the fourth quarter.
Accordingly, the economy grew by 7.4 percent in 2017.
Domestic demand was the driver of both quarterly and annual growth in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Despite expired tax reductions, private spending rose substantially in the fourth quarter, while public spending provided an accelerated boost to growth.
Despite having contributed to annual growth, investment restrained quarterly growth.
On the other hand, net exports contributed negatively to both quarterly and annual growth, as total imports registered a sharp increase due to strong domestic demand and historically high gold imports even though exports remained solid.
Survey indicators for the first quarter of 2018 and industrial production data for the January- February period suggest that industrial activity continued to grow, albeit at a slower rate than in the previous quarter.
The acceleration in sectors supplying intermediate inputs for construction activity was particularly notable.
The robust activity in industries closely associated with tourism, such as textiles and clothing, supported the manufacturing industry output.
Survey indicators show some moderation in services and trade activity.
Indicators point to some moderation in the quarterly growth of private consumption demand.
Meanwhile, indicators for investment demand signal a rise in both machinery-equipment and construction investment for the first quarter.
The jump in public investment spending and the increased public spending on goods and services were of particular significance in this period.
The rising external demand led by the favorable global growth outlook and Turkey’s flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate exports.
According to February data, the rebound in tourism is strengthening while the number of tourists from regions whose per capita spending is relatively higher, such as Europe, is increasing.
On the other hand, transport and shuttle trading remain strong.
Due to the quarterly moderation in private consumption demand, imports of goods and services slowed slightly in the first quarter.
The Committee noted that net exports is likely to contribute positively to quarterly growth under these circumstances.
Amid the cumulative depreciation of the real exchange rate, the recovering tourism and the strengthening global growth, exports of goods and services are expected to provide further strong stimulus to growth and affect favorably the current account balance.
However, the rise in energy prices hinders the improvement in the current account balance.
The robust economic activity supports the labor market.
Nonfarm employment rose month- on-month in January owing to construction and industrial sectors, whereas services employment fell slightly.
Leading indicators signal a continued fall in unemployment rates for the first quarter.
Domestic demand continues to expand and growing external demand contributes positively to exports.
Current data on global economy point to stable and strong growth across both advanced and emerging economies.
Global growth is estimated to have accelerated in the first quarter, leading to upward revisions to forecasts for 2018.
Despite rising commodity and energy prices amid solid growth outlook, consumer and core inflation rates are moderate across the globe.
The risks to the global economic outlook are tilted to the downside for the upcoming period.
The primary downside risks to the global growth outlook are the geopolitical tensions and the growing protectionist agenda in international trade.
The newly passed US tax reform is poised to provide a growth boost to the US and its trading partners, which is considered as an upside risk factor for the world economy.
The US government’s announcement in March to impose additional customs tariffs on imported steel and aluminum might spark more protectionism in international trade across the world.
The extent to which such policies will affect global growth will depend on how other trading partners will respond.
An analysis of risks to global inflation reveals that geopolitical developments coupled with uncertainties regarding trade policies are likely to pose upside risks to commodity prices, particularly to energy and metal prices.
Moreover, in line with the falling unemployment rates in advanced economies, the possibility of wages to increase more rapidly than the current trends is among the major risk factors to push inflation up.
Unless notable upside surprises occur in global inflation under the mentioned risk factors, it is considered that major central banks, the Fed and the ECB in particular, will continue to normalize monetary policy in line with expectations, and the impact on financial markets will remain limited.
However, the possibility of accelerated inflation amid strong demand conditions accompanied by surging commodity prices in advanced economies may trigger a faster-than-projected tightening in these countries.
In such a case, global financial markets may witness fluctuations as in early February, and emerging economies may face higher volatility in exchange rates and weakening portfolio flows.
Further ahead, the baseline outlook envisages a sustained support from the favorable global economic outlook to Turkey’s external demand, an increase in portfolio flows, and a decline in commodity prices as implied by the futures markets.
Under a potential scenario of waning global growth and rising commodity prices, the Turkish economy may face cost-push inflationary pressures and widened current account deficit.
In such a case, the CBRT will formulate the monetary policy response assessing the disinflationary impact of weaker demand conditions in tandem with the second-round effects of cost pressures on inflation.
Should this scenario be accompanied by portfolio outflows, the extent of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation to consumer prices and the potential impact on overall financial stability will shape the monetary policy response as well.
The volatility in global financial markets in February coupled with geopolitical developments had reflections on domestic financial conditions as well.
Accordingly, the risk premium increased slightly, portfolio flows declined, the Turkish lira depreciated with a rise in volatility, and interest rates in financial markets as well as loan rates increased.
The credit 3 market reveals that the accelerating effect of the Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF) support of 2017 have dissipated to a great extent.
In addition to the developments in commercial loans, the consequences of the deceleration in consumer loans on economic activity are monitored closely.
All in all, the domestic financial conditions are expected to remain on the current trajectory, should the rising trend of external interest rates continues as per expectations.
The fiscal measures and incentives to support the economic activity as well as the CGF- backed credit expansion produced a strong recovery in domestic demand in 2017, thereby weakening the disinflationary transmission of monetary policy.
The expansionary effect of these policies, also taking into account the lagged effects, are estimated to have peaked in the first quarter of 2018, and the economic activity is expected to start to revert to its main trend from the second quarter on, which will gradually lessen the effect of aggregate demand conditions on inflation.
Turkey’s flexibility in diversifying export markets and the cumulative real exchange rate depreciation, as well as the favorable global growth outlook for 2018 are expected to continue supporting exports and growth.
A relatively moderate outlook for domestic demand is expected as a result of the waning effect of the supportive policies.
Against this background, uncertainties over monetary policies of major central banks, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments continue to pose downside risks to growth.
In the first quarter of 2018, cost pressures played a significant role in shaping not only producer prices but also consumer prices led also by the robust demand conditions.
High levels of inflation and the rise in inflation expectations keep the risks to the pricing behavior alive.
For instance, the fact that the producer price inflation improved only slightly in the first quarter despite the relatively mild course of input costs indicates that firms can raise prices more easily in the high inflation environment.
Indeed, the diffusion indices show evidence that the economic agents’ tendency to raise prices rose to quite high levels in the first quarter.
In addition, wage increases hinder the improvement in services inflation because of the sector’s labor-intensive structure.
As a result of the significant backward indexation behavior in the service sector, inflation inertia is strong in this sector.
Productivity gains are imperative to contain the adverse effect of rigidities arising from wage and price setting behaviors on price stability.
The risks are on the upside for food inflation, another significant factor underlying the inflation forecasts.
Despite a decline in the second half of 2017 due to the import measures, the red meat prices surged in the first quarter of 2018.
Given the supply conditions in the sector, the red meat prices constitute an upside risk factor to food prices in the remainder of the year.
The projections for food inflation are based on the assumption that measures taken by the Food Committee will balance considerably the upside risks to food prices.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term projections to be presented in the April Inflation Report.
Accordingly, the inflation forecast for end-2018 was revised upwards by 0.5 points, while that for 2019 was kept intact.
Given a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, inflation is projected to converge gradually to the 5-percent target, falling to 8.4 percent at the end of 2018, 6.5 percent at the end of 2019, and stabilizing around 5 percent over the medium term.
The Committee judges that the rigidity in the underlying inflation indicators and the high levels of core inflation in the first quarter continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior, and 4 in addition, that the recent rise in import prices also weighs on these risks.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to implement a measured monetary tightening in April to support price stability.
The Committee also assessed the technical presentations on finalizing the simplification process of the monetary policy’s operational framework and enhancing the predictability of monetary policy.
Public finance has been providing more support to disinflation, which confirms the stronger coordination between monetary and fiscal policies.
There was no significant inflationary impact arising from tax increases throughout 2017.
The joint efforts to transform policy coordination into a continuous and systematic framework will contribute to disinflation in 2018 as well.
Moreover, sustaining structural steps to reduce inertia and volatility in inflation will contribute positively to the price stability and social welfare.
In consideration of recent developments, the .
Committee (the Committee) reviewed the risk scenarios discussed in the meeting on 25 April 2018 as well as the Inflation Report.
Financial conditions have recently tightened in advanced economies.
The probability of an accelerated inflation due to brisk demand conditions and rising commodity prices constitutes a risk of triggering a faster-than-projected tightening in monetary policies of these countries.
The Federal Reserve (the Fed) is more likely to implement three more policy rate hikes in the remainder of 2018, and the US bond returns have increased.
Led also by the appreciation trend in the USD, global financial markets have witnessed fluctuations, the risk sentiment for emerging economies have deteriorated, exchange rates saw depreciation and increased volatility and portfolio flows lost momentum.
Fluctuating global financial markets have a tightening effect on domestic financial conditions.
Due to geopolitical developments accompanied by prospects for macro indicators such as inflation and the current account deficit, Turkey grew more sensitive against global fluctuations.
Due to higher risk premium and lower portfolio flows, the depreciation and volatility in the Turkish lira was higher compared to the currencies of other emerging economies.
The depreciation trend in the Turkish lira has gained pace since the third week of May and signaled for unhealthy price formations inconsistent with economic fundamentals.
Accordingly, considering the effects of unhealthy price formations and excessive volatilities in the markets on the inflation outlook, the Central Bank has introduced some adjustments for the foreign exchange market since the meeting on 25 April.
These adjustments aim at controlled and efficient provision of the liquidity required by the market in times of excessive volatility.
It was announced on 7 May 2018 that the upper limit for the foreign exchange maintenance facility within the reserve options mechanism was lowered from 55 percent to 45 percent, and tranches were re-adjusted.
Through this revision, banks were provided with foreign exchange liquidity and Turkish lira liquidity conditions were tightened.
With an announcement on 9 May 2018, the daily amount of Foreign Exchange Deposits against Turkish Lira Deposits auctions was raised from 1.25 billion USD to 1.5 billion USD.
Accordingly, the maximum total outstanding deposit amount in the auctions of 6.25 billion USD was enabled to amount to 7.5 billion USD.
Through the same announcement, the 1 calendar for Turkish lira-settled forward foreign exchange sale auctions to be held in the second quarter of 2018 was updated.
Accordingly, the amount of forward foreign exchange sale position was increased to 7.1 billion USD.
and the Policy Rate 7.
In the previous meeting, the Committee viewed the case in which cost-push inflationary pressures on the Turkish economy are accompanied by portfolio outflows as a risk scenario, and stated that the extent of the pass-through from rising exchange rates to consumer prices and the potential impact on overall financial stability will shape the monetary policy response.
Consumer prices rose by 1.87 percent in April, and annual inflation increased by 0.62 points to 10.85 percent.
The rise in inflation was mostly due to oil prices and exchange rate-driven increases in prices of energy and core goods.
Annual inflation rates and underlying trends of core indicators went up due to developments in core goods.
Annual food inflation declined on the back of unprocessed food prices whereas annual inflation in indices B and C increased by 0.59 and 0.80 points to 12.54 and 12.24 percent, respectively.
Producer-driven cost pressures were stronger than in the previous month while demand conditions caused cost shocks to have a more significant effect on inflation.
High inflation and rising inflation expectations keep risks to pricing behavior alive.
According to diffusion indices, economic agents are much more inclined to raise prices.
The inertia in the indicators for underlying inflation trends and the high levels of core inflation continue to pose risks to pricing behavior.
In addition, the recent increases in import prices, particularly for oil, add to these risks.
After a robust first quarter, economic activity has begun to converge to its underlying trend as of the second quarter of 2018.
Although aggregate demand conditions are likely to have a steadily waning effect on inflation, the cost pressures from the recent Turkish lira depreciation and their potential second-round effects weigh on the inflation outlook.
In sum, the recent unhealthy price formations in the markets and the ongoing increase in inflation expectations continue to pose risks to pricing behavior.
Against this background, the Committee decided to implement a strong monetary tightening to support price stability.
Accordingly, the Late Liquidity Window lending rate was raised from 13.5 to 16.5 percent.
At the meeting, the Committee also agreed to simplify the operational framework shortly in order to enhance the predictability of monetary policy and strengthen the transmission mechanism.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored, and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
In May, consumer prices rose by 1.62 percent and annual inflation increased by 1.30 points to 12.15 percent.
The uptick in inflation spread across subgroups in this period.
Persisting producer-price-driven cost pressures proved stronger relative to April.
All in all, core indicators witnessed an increase in annual inflation, and their underlying trend maintained a high course.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages went up by 2.19 points to 11.00 percent in May.
The uptick in the annual food inflation was led by the unprocessed food group, while the annual processed food inflation remained on a downward track.
Seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices recorded a notable increase, with items such as vegetables, potato, white and red meat and eggs in the lead.
Price increases in processed food, which proved high across the first quarter, decelerated further in May as in April, and the group’s annual inflation receded to 13.42 percent.
Energy prices increased by 1.74 percent in May and annual energy inflation rose by 3.18 points to 15.17 percent, largely due to the low base effect accompanied by exchange rate developments and the course of oil prices.
Owing to the tax arrangement in fuel products (re-arrangement of lump-sum special consumption tax amounts according to the changes in domestic refinery outlet prices due to the international oil prices or the exchange rate), it is expected that price increases in the energy group will lose pace, but the group’s annual inflation will remain on the rise in June.
In May, prices of services rose by 1.17 percent and annual services inflation inched up by 0.25 points to 9.52 percent, mostly due the to transport and restaurants-hotels groups.
Inflation in transport services was pushed up by highway passenger transport, while the restaurants-hotels group saw rising prices in catering and accommodation services.
These groups also reflected cost pressures led by the exchange rate as well as oil and food prices in addition to demand-side effects driven by the upbeat performance in tourism.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 0.52 points to 15.98 percent.
Annual inflation declined somewhat in the clothing group, but picked up in other subgroups.
The persisting upsurge in prices of durable goods continued in May, which was led by the prices of automobiles and white goods.
In the other core goods group, prices posted increases due to the items with large import content such as housing maintenance and repair equipment and domestic cleaning products.
In sum, cumulative deprecation in the Turkish lira stood out as the main driver of the rise in the core goods inflation in May.
The base effect and cost factors are likely to continue to exert upward pressure on annual inflation in June.
Moreover, leading indicators signal that some subcategories of the unprocessed food group may register price hikes well above seasonal averages.
Considered mostly temporary, this movement is monitored closely.
As a result, cost factors are the main driver of the upsurge in inflation.
On the other hand, price increases marked a generalized pattern across subsectors.
Despite the mild outlook for demand conditions, elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior.
Data for the first quarter of 2018 suggest a maintained strength in economic activity.
Although industrial production lost momentum in quarterly growth compared to previous quarters, its annual growth proved strong with 9.8 percent.
In this period, sectors providing inetermediate inputs to the construction activity and sectors strongly affiliated to tourism supported industral production.
The data reveal a mild course in sectoral activities other than industry as well.
Domestic demand stood out as the main driver of quarterly growth in the first quarter.
Private consumption remained on the rise, while investments, also supported by the public sector, were mainly contsruction oriented in the first quarter.
Despite the sustained increase in gold imports, with the robust course in exports of goods excluding gold besides tourism revenues, net exports are expected to boost quarterly growth.
Recently released data indicate a rebalancing trend in the economic activity.
Data for the second quarter indicate that external demand maintains its strength.
Amid the favorable global growth outlook, rising external demand and flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate exports.
The Committee noted that the rebound in tourism and transportation revenues remains rather brisk, and under these circumstances, net exports will provide positive contribution to quarterly growth in the second quarter as well.
In the upcoming period, exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and the balancing in the domestic demand is likely to halt the upward trend in the current account deficit.
However, soaring energy prices and gold imports hinder the improvement in the current account balance.
Domestic demand displays a more moderate course in the second quarter.
Survey indicators point to a weaker consumer confidence as well as the trends of orders in firms especially producing for the domestic market.
The current outlook signals for a domestic demand- driven slowdown, which is consistent with past projections that economic activity would converge to the uynderlying trend.
In the close future, rising volatility in financial markets and perceptions of uncertainty, the depreciation in the Turkish lira and mounting financing costs may restrain domestic demand through investments.
Meanwhile, accommodative fiscal measures are projected to moderate the slowdown in domestic demand.
In the first quarter, the maintained strength of economic activity supported the increase in employment and the decline in unemployment.
Leading indicators signal that the balancing in economic activity in the period ahead may result in some deceleration in the labor market improvement.
In sum, recently released data indicate that economic activity remains strong in the first quarter, while it is converging to its underlying trend in the second quarter amid the balancing in domestic demand.
Current data on global economy point to stable and strong growth both in advanced and emerging economies.
Data for the first quarter hint at an accelerated global growth compared to the previous quarter, and the prospects for the year end remain positive.
Despite rising commodity and energy prices amid the solid growth outlook, consumer and core inflation rates are moderate across the globe.
to the global growth outlook are more on the downside for the upcoming period.
Major risks that can pose a drag on global growth include geopolitical tensions and the rising protectionist sentiment in international trade.
Both the US government’s decision not to exempt EU member states from the additional customs tariffs on imported steel and aluminum and political uncertainty add to the downside risks to EU growth that slowed down in the first quarter of the year.
The newly passed US tax reform is poised to provide a growth boost to the US and its trading partners, which is considered a major upside risk to global growth.
After the March announcement on imposing additional customs tariffs on imported steel and aluminum, the US government lifted certain country exemptions from tariffs in early June, sparking possibly more protectionism in international trade across the world.
In fact, impacted trading partners are poised to impose retaliatory tariffs that would spark more trade protectionism.
The potential negative spillovers of such policies on global growth will depend on the size and form of the response of other trading partners.
An analysis of risks to global inflation reveals that geopolitical developments coupled with uncertainties regarding trade policies are likely to pose upside risks to commodity prices, especially to energy and metal prices.
Moreover, in line with the falling unemployment rates in advanced economies, the possibility of wages to increase more rapidly than current trends is among major risk factors to push up inflation.
The probability of an accelerated inflation due to brisk demand conditions and rising commodity prices constitutes a risk of triggering a faster-than-projected tightening in monetary policies across these countries.
US bond returns have been on the rise since mid-April as the Federal Reserve (the Fed) hints at three policy rate hikes in the remainder of 2018.
Amid the appreciation of the US dollar, global financial markets have recently witnessed fluctuations, the risk sentiment towards emerging economies has deteriorated, exchange rates saw depreciation and increased volatility and portfolio flows lost momentum.
Fluctuating global financial markets have a tightening effect on domestic financial conditions, which led to a higher risk premium, slower portfolio flows, a weaker and more volatile Turkish lira and higher market and loan rates.
Geopolitical developments and the outlook for macro indicators such as inflation and the current account deficit made Turkey more sensitive to global fluctuations.
Due to higher risk premium and reduced portfolio flows, the Turkish lira faced more depreciation and volatility compared to other emerging market currencies.
On the credit market front, the loan boost created by the CGF support of 2017 has largely subsided and in addition to commercial loans, there has been a balancing in consumer loans, especially in housing loans.
Hence, both external and domestic developments suggest that financial conditions will remain tight over the upcoming period.
After a robust first quarter, economic activity started to converge to its underlying trend in the second quarter.
The uncertainty over monetary policies across advanced economies and geopolitical tensions feed into downside risks to economic activity.
The recent financial 3 market volatility and the mounting uncertainty pose downside risks to domestic demand and the growth outlook, particularly via investment spending.
The tighter monetary policy stance is likely to decrease financial volatility and contain downside risks to growth.
On the other hand, the strong tourism rebound, the upbeat global growth outlook and accommodative real exchange rates are expected to provide further positive contribution to the growth composition and the current account balance.
The Committee emphasized that the steps toward tighter monetary policy should be accompanied by an enhanced macro policy coordination to ensure a modest rebalancing of the economy.
Although aggregate demand conditions are likely to have a steadily waning effect on inflation, the significant cost pressures from the recent Turkish lira depreciation and their potential second-round effects weigh on the inflation outlook.
Thus, considering the effects of unhealthy pricing and excessive volatilities across markets on the inflation outlook, the Central Bank introduced some adjustments for the foreign exchange market since the interim meeting on 23 May.
Accordingly, on 24 May 2018, the Bank announced an update to the calendar for Turkish lira- settled forward foreign exchange sale auctions to be held in the second quarter of 2018, thus raising the amount of forward foreign exchange sale position from 7.1 billion USD to 8 billion USD.
Moreover, the upper limit for the total amount of forward foreign exchange sale position was determined to be USD 10 billion until end-2018.
Additionally, on 25 May 2018, the Bank decided to allow repayments of rediscount credits for export and foreign exchange earning services to be made in Turkish liras at a fixed exchange rate.
Furthermore, on 28 May 2018, the Committee announced its decision to complete the simplification process regarding the operational framework of monetary policy.
Accordingly, the one-week repo rate will be the main policy rate of the Central Bank.
This rate is set equal to the late liquidity window lending rate in effect on the date of meeting.
In addition, the Central Bank overnight borrowing and lending rates are determined at 150 basis points below/above the one-week repo rate.
Thus, the overnight borrowing and lending rates will form a symmetrical corridor around the one-week repo auction rate, keeping market rates from deviating significantly from the weekly repo auction rate.
The new operational framework that took effect on 1 June 2018 is expected to enhance the predictability of monetary policy and strengthen the transmission mechanism.
With the strong policy response at the interim meeting on 23 May 2018 and the simplified operational framework, the Committee has partially restrained the domestic financial market volatility.
Nevertheless, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to further strengthen the monetary tightening in June to support price stability and raised the policy rate (one week repo auction rate) from 16.5 percent to 17.75 percent.
Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
In June, consumer prices rose by 2.61 percent and annual inflation increased by 3.24 points to 15.39 percent.
The rise in annual inflation was widespread across subcategories, with the most significant contribution coming from unprocessed food.
Cost pressures from recent exchange rate developments drove prices higher in many related items.
Producer prices exerted even stronger upward pressure on consumer prices compared to a month earlier.
Thus, core indicators saw a notable increase in both their annual inflation rates and underlying trends.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 7.89 points to 18.89 percent in June.
This increase was driven by the unprocessed food inflation that soared due to vegetables prices.
In this period, there was significant divergence between the producer prices for PPI for agriculture and the consumer prices for food.
The widening gap between producer and consumer price levels for some vegetables signaled market problems associated with the distribution channel.
Meanwhile, processed food prices recorded increases across all subcategories, pushing annual processed food inflation up to 14.47 percent.
In the upcoming period, bread and raw milk reference purchase prices might put upward pressure on processed food prices.
Energy prices increased by 1.01 percent in June and annual energy inflation rose by 1.82 points to 16.99 percent.
Solid fuel, bottled gas and administered municipal water prices were up, whereas fuel prices remained flat due to the new sliding-scale tariff system.
In the period ahead, administered energy prices will likely reflect the cumulative cost pressures from exchange rates and oil prices.
In June, annual services inflation increased by 1.44 points to 10.96 percent.
The rise in services inflation was widespread across subcategories.
Communication services inflation went up on the back of internet tariffs, while transport services inflation was driven higher by cumulative cost pressures and the buoyant domestic and international tourism industry.
The tourism upsurge was the main driver of price hikes in related subcategories, such as catering, accommodation and package tours.
In summary, prices of services reflected not only cost 1 pressures from exchange rates, oil prices and food prices but also demand-side effects of the favorable tourism outlook.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 2.57 points to 18.55 percent in June, largely due to recent exchange rate developments.
Thus, prices of durable goods and other core goods posted sharp widespread increases.
Clothing inflation, however, remained flat in this period.
The exchange rate-driven rise in costs is likely to put further inflationary pressure on prices of core goods in coming months.
Economic activity proved a little stronger than projected in the first quarter of 2018.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 2.0 percent on a quarterly basis and 7.4 percent on an annual basis.
Main driver of quarterly growth was domestic demand, particularly private consumption in the first quarter.
Investment offered rather limited support to growth due to the muted course of machinery-equipment investments.
Net exports contributed positively to quarterly growth owing both to the contraction in imports coupled with the rebound in tourism.
Recently released data indicate a more significant rebalancing trend in economic activity.
Data for the second quarter reveal that external demand maintains its strength.
Amid favorable global growth outlook, rising external demand and flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate exports.
The Committee noted that the rebound in revenues from tourism and other services is rather brisk, and under these circumstances, net exports will provide positive contribution to quarterly growth in the second quarter as well.
In the upcoming period, exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and the slowdown in import demand resulting from the subdued domestic demand is likely to have further positive repercussions on the current account balance.
In the second quarter, signs of deceleration in domestic demand became more visible.
In this period, the depreciation in the Turkish lira accompanied by the increased financial volatility, perceptions of uncertainty and financing costs decelerated domestic demand both through the consumption and investment expenditures channels.
The slowdown in domestically- oriented sectors, particularly sectors affiliated to construction, confirms this outlook.
Meanwhile, accommodative stance of the public sector conducted through expenditures and fiscal measures are projected to moderate the slowdown in domestic demand to some extent.
Survey indicators point that the rebalancing process in economic activity may continue in the third quarter.
The ongoing improvement in the labor market came to halt in the second quarter, as the economic activity started to lose pace and converge to its underlying trend.
Employment in the services and industrial sectors posted mild increases in April, while the evident fall in construction employment led to a quarterly decline in non-farm employment.
In sum, data for the second quarter indicate that economic activity has assumed a rebalancing process both in terms of growth rate and composition.
However, the downside 2 risks to the magnitude and duration of the slowdown in economic activity are kept alive by the high level of financial volatility and perceptions of uncertainty.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term inflation forecasts for the July Inflation Report as well.
Accordingly, year-end consumer inflation forecasts for 2018 and 2019 were revised upwards by 5 points and 2.8 points, respectively compared to the April forecast.
With a tight policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down with enhanced policy coordination, inflation is projected to converge gradually to the target.
Accordingly, inflation is projected to be 13.4 percent at the end of 2018 and then fall to 9.3 percent at the end of 2019, 6.7 percent at the end of 2020, stabilizing around 5 percent over the medium term.
Forecasts are based on a monetary policy framework that envisaged that the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained for an extended period.
Cost factors and volatility in food prices have been the main drivers of the recent upsurge in inflation.
On the other hand, price increases have shown a generalized pattern across subsectors.
Despite the milder impact of demand conditions on inflation, elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that it might be necessary to maintain a tight monetary stance for an extended period.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged impact of recent monetary policy decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to rebalancing process, and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
The outlook that the medium-term projections presented in the Inflation Report is based on the .
Committee's judgments and assumptions.
Nevertheless, various risks to these factors may affect the inflation outlook and necessitate changes in the monetary policy stance envisaged in the baseline scenario.
The Committee evaluated that risks to the medium-term inflation outlook are mostly on the upside.
The pricing behavior, developments in global risk appetite, the contribution of fiscal policy to the rebalancing, and the lagged effects of the monetary policy will be monitored closely in the coming period.
Should these factors deviate from the baseline scenario, the monetary policy stance will be reviewed depending on the change in the inflation outlook.
In August, consumer prices rose by 2.30 percent and annual inflation increased by 2.05 points to 17.90 percent.
The rise in annual inflation was widespread across subcategories, with the most significant contribution coming from core goods and energy groups due to exchange rate developments.
In the recent period, cost pressures have elevated, economic units’ tendency to raise prices has become stronger.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.35 points to 19.75 percent in August.
In this period, seasonally adjusted unprocessed food prices remained almost flat.
Meanwhile, processed food prices increased by 2.12 percent in August, mainly due to exchange rates and developments in the prices of products used as input for processed food.
In August, energy prices increased by 5.37 percent and annual inflation in this group increased by 3.85 points to 21.34 percent.
The rise was mainly driven by increments in electricity and natural gas prices as well as increased fuel oil prices due to Special Consumption Tax (SCT) arrangements.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 3.60 points to 23.18 percent in August.
The durable goods and other core goods prices continued to increase across subcategories due to exchange rate developments.
Prices of durable consumption goods increased by 5.49 percent.
The seasonal sales in clothing group remained limited compared to previous years.
Annual services inflation increased by 0.80 points to 11.84 percent.
Transportation services inflation went up on the back of rapid rises in tourism and fuel-oil prices.
Meanwhile, the uptrend in accommodation services continued due to exchange rate developments and robust tourism activities.
In the second quarter of 2018, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 0.9 percent quarterly and by 5.2 percent annually.
Thus, economic activity slowed down to converge to its underlying trend and rebalanced in terms of its composition.
In the second quarter, the main driver of the quarterly growth was net exports backed by the recovery in tourism.
Recently released data indicate a more significant rebalancing trend in the economic activity.
According to the third quarter data, external demand maintains its strength.
Amid a stable global growth outlook, rising external demand and flexibility in diversifying export markets continue to stimulate exports.
The Committee noted that the recovery in revenues from 1 tourism and other services is rather strong, and under these circumstances, the positive contribution of net exports to quarterly growth may increase also in the third quarter.
In the upcoming period, exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and the slowdown in import demand resulting from the subdued domestic demand is likely to maintain its positive impact on the current account balance.
Data on global economy indicate that growth has stabilized and remained strong, offering a positive outlook for the year end.
Despite the rise in commodity and energy prices due to positive global growth, consumer and core inflation rates continue to follow a moderate course worldwide.
Downside risks to the global growth outlook are assessed to be more evident in the upcoming period.
Geopolitical developments and increased discourse of protectionism in foreign trade stand out as the main risk factors that may deteriorate the global growth outlook.
An assessment of global inflation risks reveals that geopolitical developments and uncertainties about foreign trade policies may pose an upward risk to commodity prices, particularly energy and metal prices.
Moreover, the likelihood of an acceleration in wages in advanced economies due to falling unemployment rates is also one of the most important risk factors for inflation in these countries.
Financial conditions in advanced economies have tightened in the recent period.
The probability of acceleration in inflation due to strong demand and the rise in commodity prices creates a risk that may trigger a faster-than-expected tightening in the monetary policies of these economies.
In particular, the ongoing positive growth performance and the new tax law in the US that can be seen as an expansionary fiscal policy increases the probability of Fed to expedite the monetary policy normalization process.
In sum, geopolitical uncertainties, weakening capital flows towards emerging economies, and the expansion of protectionism discourse in foreign trade continue to affect the outlook in emerging economies.
In this period of high volatility in financial markets, cost pressures and their second-round effects have negatively affected the inflation outlook.
Accordingly, the Committee has delivered a strong monetary tightening in September to support price stability and raised the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) to 24 percent from 17.75 percent.
It has also announced that the Central Bank funding, which used to be provided through overnight lending, will be provided via one-week repo auctions.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged impact of recent monetary policy decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to the rebalancing process, and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
The enhanced coordination between monetary policy and fiscal policy is believed to play an important role in disinflation efforts and macroeconomic rebalancing.
Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and social welfare.
In September, consumer prices rose by 6.30 percent and annual inflation increased by 6.62 points to 24.52 percent.
Price increases spread across subcategories in this period.
Effects of exchange rate developments were apparent in many items, particularly on core goods, while items with relatively low exchange rate pass-through also recorded noticeable price hikes.
Elevated exchange rate volatility weighed on inflation uncertainty, while backward- indexation in inflation trended upwards and exchange rate pass-through to consumer inflation remained strong, which resulted in a notable deterioration in the pricing behavior.
Although aggregate demand conditions started to support disinflation, the course of consumer inflation was mostly shaped by the elevated producer inflation-driven cost pressures.
Against this background, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators recorded a sharp increase.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 7.95 points to 27.70 percent in September.
This period was marked by accelerated tendency for price hikes both in processed and unprocessed food items, and all subcategories witnessed price increases.
Leading indicators for October point out that food inflation is yet to increase.
In September, energy prices increased by 6.05 percent and annual inflation in this group rose by 5.69 points to 27.03 percent.
This rise was mainly driven by price adjustments in electricity and natural gas as well as increased fuel oil prices due to the lingering effect of Special Consumption Tax (SCT) arrangements in August.
Oil prices trended upwards in this period, but the continued sliding-scale tariff restricted the possible upside risks to inflation.
The rise in energy inflation is likely to move further upwards in October due to the price adjustments in electricity and natural gas.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 11.94 points to 35.12 percent in September.
This rise was led by the sharp depreciation in the Turkish lira, and prices increased across all subcategories.
Considerable price increases were seen particularly in durable goods with high imported content (12.93 percent) and other core goods (11.22 percent).
Moreover, the clothing group registered price hikes above seasonal norms.
Core goods inflation is expected to follow a favorable course in October particularly due to durable goods supported by the recent appreciation in the Turkish lira coupled with the SCT base arrangement in automobiles.
In addition the All-Out War on Inflation Program is also considered to underpin the downtrend in inflation in the short term.
Annual services inflation increased by 2.13 points to 13.97 percent month-on-month.
The rise in the restaurants-hotels and transportation services inflation went up due to the cost- 1 side factors led by food and fuel oil prices as well as the brisk outlook in tourism.
Meanwhile, the uptrend in other services inflation is attributed to the reverberations of exchange rate developments accompanied by the price hikes in education services driven by the high levels of headline inflation.
Recently released data show that the rebalancing trend in the economy has become more noticeable.
Composite indicators of domestic demand signal a notable deceleration both in private consumption and investment expenditures, while the central government budget data show that the public expenditures’ direct support to growth recorded a decline compared to the previous period.
External demand maintains its strength in contrast to slowing domestic demand.
The Committee noted that the brisk course of revenues from tourism and other services notably boosted the contribution of net exports to quarterly growth in the third quarter.
In the upcoming period, exports of goods and services are expected to boost growth further and the slowdown in import demand resulting from the subdued domestic demand is likely to maintain its positive effect on the current account balance.
The slowdown in economic activity continues, partly due to tighter financial conditions.
Survey indicators for the last quarter show that the downtrend in the capacity utilization rate of the manufacturing industry continues across all subcategories.
The deceleration in the indicators for production and orders of domestic market-oriented sectors, particularly sectors affiliated to construction, confirms this outlook.
Prospects for exports and tourism- linked activities seem relatively better, yet the stance for employment and investment has recorded an overall worsening.
The labor market data confirmed the evaluations that the economy lost pace in the third quarter due to the domestic demand.
Sectors affiliated to foreign trade and government offered positive contributions to the services employment.
However, the fall in construction employment continued and the industrial employment registered a decline compared to the previous period.
Leading indicators signal a sustained increase in unemployment rates.
Credit conditions have remained to be tight in the third quarter.
In addition, the propensity to save in public expenditures coupled with the rise in unemployment rates hint at a further deceleration in domestic demand.
Net exports are likely to boost growth further in the last quarter and curb the slowdown in economic activity to some extent.
In sum, recently released data for the third quarter and the leading indicators for the last quarter point that the real adjustment in the economy continues with full speed and the rebalancing trend has become more pronounced.
Lingering tight financial conditions maintain the downside risks to the magnitude and duration of the slowdown in economic activity.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term inflation forecasts for the October Inflation Report as well.
Accordingly, compared to the July forecast, year-end consumer inflation forecasts for 2018 and 2019 have been revised upwards by 10.1 points and 5.9 points, respectively.
Under a tight policy stance focusing on bringing inflation down accompanied by reinforced policy coordination, inflation is projected to converge gradually to the targets.
In this respect, inflation is projected to be 23.5 percent at end-2018, and then fall to 15.2 2 percent at end-2019 and 9.3 percent at end-2020 before stabilizing around 5 percent in the medium term.
Forecasts are based on a monetary policy framework that envisages that the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained for an extended period.
Recent developments regarding the inflation outlook point to significant risks to price stability.
Price increases have shown a generalized pattern across subsectors, reflecting the movements in exchange rates.
Although weaker domestic demand conditions will partially mitigate the deterioration in the inflation outlook, upside risks to the pricing behavior continue to prevail.
The significant increase in producer prices-driven cost-side pressures, and the elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the inflation outlook in the coming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance and keep the policy rate (one week repo auction rate) constant at 24 percent.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged impact of recent monetary policy decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to the rebalancing process, and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered.
The outlook that the medium-term projections presented in the Inflation Report are based on is shaped by the .
The Committee noted that risks to the medium-term inflation outlook are mostly on the upside.
The primary risk to inflation outlook in the upcoming period would be a further deterioration in pricing behavior.
In recent months, the exchange rate pass-through to the consumer inflation has firmed, backward indexation has become more widespread, and pricing behavior has deteriorated considerably.
Although it is believed that exchange rate-related inflationary pressures will remain relatively subdued under current circumstances, risks to the inflation outlook remain solid amid highly volatile exchange rates.
In case of a failure in implementing the macroeconomic rebalancing process rapidly and effectively enough to bring inflation down amid high inflation rates and risk premium levels, inflation and exchange rate expectations may feed each other and undermine the disinflation process.
In such a case, any further deterioration in pricing behavior may necessitate a tighter-than-envisaged monetary policy stance for a longer time in order to lower inflation.
Crude oil prices and domestic food prices are also considered to constitute upside risks to inflation in the upcoming period.
Although problems in the US regarding the supply of shale oil have been largely settled in the recent period, the supply shortage due to geopolitical developments in Iran and Venezuela continues to be the major upside risk to crude oil prices.
On the other hand, increased protectionism in global trade stands out as a downward risk factor for commodity prices due to its likely adverse effect on global growth.
related to domestic food prices are projected to be on the upside because of cumulative cost-side pressures, particularly in the short term.
In this framework, the monetary policy response will be determined in such a way to curb a possible deterioration in inflation expectations and pricing behavior, taking into account the direct and secondary effects of respective risks on inflation.
The deteriorated pricing behavior, tight financial conditions and the financial state of the corporate sector have recently caused inflation dynamics to change and the uncertainty over 3 inflation and forecasts to rise.
The cumulative cost pressures on firms and the decrease in their profitability, coupled with increased working capital costs and the backward indexation behaviour in wages, may cause the disinflationary impact of the demand channel to be more limited compared to the implications of the historical data.
In the short-run, monetary policy decisions will be more sensitive to incoming data and the monetary policy stance will be revised upon detection of changes in the inflation outlook.
In the third quarter of the year, credit conditions recorded a significantly higher tightening than historical averages due to incresing risk premiums.
The rate and extent of the normalization to be observed in credit conditions in the upcoming period are important in terms of the outlook of economic activity.
As cash flows and balance sheets of firms have been adversely affected by the increase in exchange rates and loan rates as well as by the slowdown in economic activity, conducting the necessary assessments and analyses related to the asset quality of firms will have a decisive role in the credit market.
Therefore, establishing a coordination between the financial sector policies that restrict the balance sheet effects of the corporate sector and the monetary policy that focuses on inflation has become crucial for preventing the financial conditions from falling into an unproductive tightening cycle.
There are also risks stemming from global monetary policies and risk appetite developments that may lead to a decline in capital flows towards emerging economies and feed into exchange rate volatility.
The sustained monetary tightening trend and the increase in bond yields in advanced economies, heightened protectionism in global trade, Brexit developments, concerns over the budget deficit and sovereign debt of Italy, and imminent sanctions on Iran may cause the risk appetite for emerging economies to display a fluctuating pattern in the upcoming period.
This, in turn, may pose a downside risk to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
In case of excessive market volatility due to fluctuations in global liquidity conditions and in perceptions of risk, the CBRT may use liquidity measures intended for providing the market with the needed FX liquidity in a timely, controlled and effective manner.
In addition, it may introduce additional tightening in monetary policy to curb the impact of these risks on inflation and inflation expectations.
The coordination between the monetary policy and the fiscal policy is very crucial with respect to disinflation and macroeconomic rebalancing.
The fiscal policy outlook that the medium-term projections in the Inflation Report are based on incorporates a policy stance that focuses on disinflation and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with the monetary policy, which is in line with the New Economy Program announced in September.
Accordingly, the projections rest on an outlook where the fiscal policy introduces a tight fiscal discipline, as envisaged in the New Economy Program.
Moreover, it is assumed that administered prices, tax and wage adjustments will be formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward-indexation behavior.
If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to an adverse impact on the medium-term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be revised.
Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the fight against inflation.
In November, consumer prices dropped by 1.44% and annual inflation decreased by 3.62 points to 21.62%.
Annual inflation registered a decline across all subcategories.
The fall in core goods inflation was mainly led by temporary tax cuts applied to durable goods.
In this period, energy prices dropped due to the fall in oil prices and the appreciation in the Turkish lira.
Against this background, annual inflation and the underlying trend in core indicators both decelerated.
In sum, consumer prices in November reflect tax cuts, the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and falling oil prices as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic activity.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages went down by 3.60 points to 25.66% in November.
This decline was mostly driven by the fall in unprocessed food prices led by fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the processed food front, after following a high course for a while, price increases lost pace in this period.
Energy prices were down by 0.71% and annual inflation in this group fell by 4.08 points to 25.35%.
This is attributed to falling international oil prices and the appreciation in Turkish lira.
Leading indicators for December indicate that the support from fuel prices to consumer inflation continues at a strong pace.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 7.46 points to 26.89% in November owing mainly to the prices of durable goods that dropped on the back of temporary tax cuts and the high reflections of these discounts on prices in past months.
The rate of increase in clothing prices remained significantly below periodic price increases of past years.
Meanwhile, lagged effects of the exchange rate on other core goods persisted, albeit in a weaker manner.
All in all, the decline in core goods inflation in November is largely attributed to temporary tax cuts, while appreciation in the Turkish lira and weaker domestic demand emerged as other factors to support the slowdown in inflation.
The annual services inflation fell by 0.09 points to 14.67%.
Annual inflation declined in rents and transport services, but remained almost flat in communication, restaurants-hotels and other services groups.
Cost-side factors led by food and fuel prices had a positive effect on the catering and transportation services inflation.
Meanwhile, weakening domestic demand supported the overall slowdown in services inflation.
In the third quarter, Turkey’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted by 1.1% quarter-on- quarter but grew by 1.6% at an annual basis.
The economic slowdown was driven by domestic demand, with both consumption and investment expenditures down from the previous quarter.
Public consumption was another drag on quarterly growth.
As a result of the domestic demand-led sharp drop in imports coupled with robust exports of goods and strong tourism demand, net exports made an increased contribution to quarterly and annual growth and prevented the economy from contracting further.
Economic activity continues to slow amid weaker domestic demand.
In addition, with the rapid rise in inflation, real incomes fall and weigh on domestic demand.
The outlook for export and tourism-related activities remains relatively stable, but employment and investment weaken across sectors.
Despite recent signs of some slowdown in global growth, external demand maintains its strength.
Firms’ orientation towards external markets amid sluggish domestic demand and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; and external balances continue to improve rapidly on brisk tourism demand.
On the other hand, imports remain on a downward slide, largely due to consumption and investment goods, which led to historically high current account surplus in August – October period.
The rapid improvement in current account balance is expected to continue in the period ahead.
Accordingly, net exports are expected to contribute further to growth in the fourth quarter and limit the economic slowdown to some extent.
The Committee noted that exports of goods and services will continue to spur growth in the coming months and the falling import demand reflecting weak domestic demand will continue to have a positive effect on the current account balance.
Labor market data confirm that the economy continues to slow on the back of domestic demand.
In the third quarter, construction employment declined while the public sector and business activities across services and industrial sectors with relatively stronger external trade links continued to make a positive contribution to employment.
Global economic activity remained positive from the perspective of external demand, yet decelerated slightly.
Increasing protectionist trends in foreign trade increased the uncertainty over global economic policies and highlighted downside risks to the global growth outlook for the upcoming period.
The slowdown in the global economic activity was mostly driven by advanced economies, led by the euro area.
Forecasts for 2019 also point that the global growth outlook weakened slightly compared to the previous period, mainly due to the weak foreign trade.
Additionally, developments related to the Brexit keep uncertainties over both the economic activity and financial markets in the euro area alive.
Despite the weakening global economic activity, global inflation has risen due to both advanced and emerging economies.
This rise is mainly attributable to energy prices led by oil prices, which generally hovered at high levels throughout the first three quarters of 2018.
In the recent period, oil prices have decreased notably driven by both supply and demand factors.
This decline is expected to exert downward pressure on the inflation of both advanced and emerging economies.
On the wages front, the unemployment rates, which are 2 at historically low levels in some advanced economies, remain to be a wages driven upside risk factor for global inflation.
The normalization expectations regarding the monetary policy of advanced economies is more moderate compared to the previous period, mainly due to the relative weakening of global growth outlook and the decline in oil prices.
Although this outlook implies more favorable conditions in terms of portfolio flows to emerging economies, increased uncertainties over global economic policies may affect risk appetite adversely, thereby posing downside risks to portfolio flows.
While developments in import prices and domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in the inflation outlook, risks to price stability continue to prevail.
Elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations, and uncertainties over the course of cost factors continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior in the coming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and kept the policy rate (one week repo auction rate) constant at 24%.
The fiscal policy outlook that the monetary policy is based on incorporates a policy stance that focuses on price stability and macroeconomic rebalancing and that is coordinated with the monetary policy.
Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered price, tax and wage adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reducing the backward indexation behavior.
Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the achievement of price stability.
Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.
In December, consumer prices decreased by 0.40 percent and annual inflation fell by 1.32 points to 20.30 percent.
The largest contribution to the decline in inflation came from energy and core goods groups.
Oil prices and exchange rate developments favorably affected the energy group, while core goods prices were affected by both exchange rate developments and weaker domestic demand.
Services inflation decreased across all subcategories.
Against this background, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend in core indicators decelerated.
In sum, consumer prices in December reflect the appreciation in the Turkish lira as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic activity.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages maintains its elevated levels with 25.11 percent.
As of December, annual food inflation is 27,09 percent in unprocessed food group and 23,22 percent in processed food group.
Energy prices were down by 3.12 percent in December and annual inflation in this group fell by 4.53 points to 20.82 percent.
This is mainly attributed to the decline in fuel prices driven by the fall in international oil prices as well as the developments in the Turkish lira.
Annual inflation in the energy group is projected to decrease significantly in January mostly due to the adjustments in electricity and natural gas prices as well as to the reductions in municipal water prices in some cities.
Annual core goods inflation dropped by 2.22 points to 24.67 percent in December.
In this period, durable goods prices decreased across all subcategories, most visibly in automobiles.
The deceleration in annual clothing and footwear inflation also continued in December due to demand conditions.
Although monthly price increases in other core goods significantly lost pace, annual inflation in this group remained high.
To sum up, the decline in core goods inflation is attributed to the appreciation in the Turkish lira and the weaker domestic demand.
Services inflation decreased by 0.21 points to 14.46 percent.
Annual inflation remained flat in the communication group but declined in other subcategories.
Cost-side factors led by food and fuel prices continued to have a favorable effect on the catering and transportation services inflation.
The Committee noted that the deceleration in monthly inflation in the rents group persisted.
It also reiterated that the weakening domestic demand supported the overall slowdown in services inflation.
Industrial production decreased in the October-November period compared to the third quarter of 2018, and current indicators signal that the weak course in the sector also continued in December.
Indicators for services and construction sectors also reveal that the slowdown in economic activity has spread to all sectors.
As a result of the domestic demand-led sharp decline in imports coupled with robust exports of goods and strong tourism demand, net exports continued to make a large contribution to quarterly and annual growth in the final quarter of the year and partially prevented the economic activity from weakening further.
Slowdown in economic activity continues, partly due to tight financial conditions.
Although there has been some improvement in financial indicators recently, loan demand and supply remain subdued.
Leading indicators have yet to show signs of recovery in domestic demand.
The extended tax cuts for durable goods are likely to spur consumer demand in the first quarter.
However, the weak labor market will continue to curb aggregate demand.
Firms’ orientation towards external markets amid sluggish domestic demand and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; and the external balance continues to improve rapidly on brisk tourism demand.
Thus, the current account balance is expected to maintain its improving trend in the upcoming period.
Labor market data confirm that the economy continues to slow down on the back of domestic demand.
In the September-November period, construction employment declined further while industrial employment remained flat, and services employment picked up slightly.
Business activities with relatively stronger external trade links and the public sector continued to make a positive contribution to employment.
Increased protectionist trends in international trade continue to keep the risks to the global growth outlook alive by increasing uncertainties regarding global economic policies.
The global economic slowdown has been slightly more pronounced since the previous MPC meeting.
Therefore, the outlook for 2019 has been revised down for both advanced and emerging economies.
The buoyant labor markets across advanced economies sustain the wages-backed upside risks to global inflation.
Nevertheless, given the weaker global growth otlook and the fall in oil prices, the global inflation pressures are judged to be mild in the upcoming period.
Still, the Committee will continue to closely monitor the risks to global inflation arising from the high volatility of energy prices and the wage inflation.
Expectations on the normalization of monetary policy stances in advanced economies have moderated since the last MPC meeting.
However, global financial risks and the uncertainty over global economic policies are rather elevated for the coming months, upholding the downside risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
While developments in import prices and domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in the inflation outlook, risks to price stability prevail.
Accordingly, the 2 Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and kept the policy rate (one-week repo auction rate) constant at 24 percent.
Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reducing the backward indexation behavior.
In February, consumer prices increased by 0.16% and annual inflation fell by 0.68 points to 19.67%.
Annual inflation receded in subgroups other than energy.
This rise in energy inflation was driven by oil prices, while the core goods inflation was affected by the mild course of the exchange rate as well as the subdued domestic demand.
Services inflation offered a limited contribution to disinflation, yet remained high.
Against this background, core inflation indicators recorded a slowed annual inflation.
Meanwhile, the underlying trend of core indicators rose slightly, yet remained low.
In sum, the recent moderation in the Turkish lira as well as the weak domestic demand support the fall in consumer inflation, whereas cumulative cost pressures put a limit on better prospects.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages declined by 1.72 points in February to 29.95%, contributed both by the processed and unprocessed food groups.
Annual inflation in these groups stood at 20.18% and 39.07%, respectively.
The fall in the unprocessed food group was led by fresh fruits and vegetables, while the annual inflation in this group remained high with 59.75%.
Energy prices were up by 0.75% in February and annual energy inflation rose by 1.51 points to 14.57%.
This is mainly attributed to the rising fuel and bottled gas prices in tandem with the outlook for international energy prices.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 1.53 points to 21.22% in February.
In this period, annual inflation lost further pace across all subcategories.
Prices of durable goods maintained the downtrend, while the clothing and footwear group witnessed a slower decline in annual inflation led by the weak domestic demand.
Monthly price increases remained subdued also in other core goods.
To sum up, the recent modest course of core goods inflation is attributed to the course of the Turkish lira and the slow progress of domestic demand.
Following an upsurge in January, services inflation posted a relatively mild increase in February by 0.58%.
Thus, annual services inflation declined by 0.26 points to 15.14%.
Annual inflation remained flat in rents, but decreased in other subgroups.
Annual price increases in the restaurants-hotel group recorded an increase in tandem with the food inflation.
Led also by demand conditions, annual inflation in transportation services posted a decline due chiefly to highway and airway transport fees.
Despite the slow course of domestic demand, services inflation remained elevated due to the cost factors as well as the backward-indexation behavior.
Industrial production posted a quarter-on-quarter fall in the fourth quarter of 2018, and the economic slowdown has spread across all sectors as suggested by indicators for services and construction.
It has been assessed that, despite the slowdown in domestic demand and imports, net exports, coupled with robust exports of goods and tourism demand have continued to boost quarterly and annual growth in the last quarter.
Economic activity displays a slow pace, partly due to tight financial conditions.
Increasing public expenditure, extended tax cuts for durable goods and the partial rebound in loan growth appear to have spurred domestic demand in the first quarter.
Despite recent signs of a global economic slowdown, particularly for the EU, external demand maintains its relative strength.
Firms’ orientation towards external markets amid sluggish domestic demand and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; lagged exchange rate effects, loans and economic slowdown dampen import demand, and the external balance continues to improve rapidly on brisk tourism demand.
Labor market data confirm that the economy continues to slow.
In the October-December period, nonfarm employment was down quarter-on-quarter across all sectors, construction in particular; while unemployment remained on the rise.
The global economy continued to lose momentum since the previous MPC meeting, with the EU posting a more noticeable downturn.
Therefore, global growth forecasts for 2019 have been revised down.
Protectionist trends in international trade keep the downside risks to the global growth outlook alive by increasing uncertainties regarding global economic policies.
Nevertheless, given the weaker global growth outlook and the course of energy prices, global inflation pressures are expected to be mild in the upcoming period.
As the deceleration in global growth became more pronounced, the outlook regarding the monetary policy stance of advanced economies further eased compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
This outlook implies more favorable conditions in terms of portfolio flows to emerging economies, however elevated levels of uncertainty over global economic policies and global financial risks keep the downside risks to portfolio flows alive.
While developments in import prices and domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in inflation indicators, risks to price stability continue to prevail.
Elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations, and uncertainties over the course of cost factors and pricing behavior continue to pose risks to the inflation outlook in the coming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and kept the policy rate (one-week repo auction rate) constant at 24%.
In March, consumer prices were up by 1.03% and annual inflation rose by 0.04 points to 19.71%.
In this period, annual inflation increased in food and energy groups while it decreased in the core goods group.
The rise in annual food inflation was driven by the significant hike in prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Energy prices rose mainly due to international oil prices and exchange rate developments.
While services inflation followed an almost flat course, the slowdown in core goods inflation continued across all subgroups.
Against this background, core inflation indicators suggested a continued deceleration in annual inflation, and the underlying trend of core indicators remained low.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.52 points in March to 29.77%.
Unprocessed food prices, led by fresh fruit and vegetable prices, had a decisive role in this development.
The processed food group posted moderate price increases while annual inflation in this group declined.
Energy prices were up by 1.94% and annual energy inflation rose by 1.84 points to 16.41%.
This rise is mainly attributed to the rising fuel and bottled gas prices in tandem with exchange rates and the outlook for international oil prices.
In March, annual core goods inflation dropped by 1.30 points to 19.92%.
In this period, annual inflation decreased across all subgroups.
The decline in durable goods prices was mainly driven by the fall in automobile prices while the new season price hikes in the clothing group remained below those of the previous year.
Annual inflation in other core goods lost pace but still remained high.
To sum up, the moderate course of core goods inflation is attributed to weak domestic demand.
Services inflation rose month-on-month by 0.07 points to 15.21%.
Annual inflation slightly decreased in restaurants-hotels, rents, and transportation services whereas it increased in the other services subgroup.
The decline in annual inflation in transportations services was led by local passenger transportation.
Meanwhile, the increase in prices of maintenance- repair services as well as in prices of education services driven by private school fees constituted the most significant factor affecting other services inflation.
In the final quarter of 2018, GDP decreased by 3.0% on an annual basis and by 2.4% on a quarterly basis.
Thus, growth in 2018 was 2.6%.
While the contraction in economic activity in the final quarter of 2018 was driven by domestic demand conditions, net exports continued to underpin growth and the rebalancing trend in the Turkish economy became more apparent.
Recently released data show that the rebalancing trend in the economy continues.
Economic activity displays a slow pace due to tight financial conditions.
The rise in public expenditures, extended tax cuts on durable goods and the partial rebound in loan volume underpinned a moderate recovery in domestic demand in the first quarter.
Accordingly, while a partial recovery is observed in economic activity compared to the previous quarter, the contribution of aggregate demand conditions to disinflation continues.
The recent rise in financial volatility and risk premium indicators increases the downside risks to the domestic demand outlook.
Despite recent signs of a global slowdown, particularly for the EU, external demand remains relatively strong.
Firms’ orientation towards external markets amid sluggish domestic demand and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; lagged exchange rate effects, subdued loans and economic activity dampen import demand; and external balance continues to improve rapidly on brisk tourism demand.
Labor market data confirm the slowdown in economic activity.
The data for January 2019 suggest that nonfarm employment was down across all sectors compared to the previous period, construction in particular; while unemployment remained on the rise.
Economic activity has lost further momentum across the world, particularly in the EU, since the previous MPC meeting.
The ongoing political uncertainty surrounding the EU, the current trade conflict between the US and China and geopolitical tensions have led to higher uncertainty over global economic policies and persistently fragile financial markets, which feeds into the downside risks to global economic activity.
Supply-side effects may pose upside risks to prices for international crude oil and other commodities in the upcoming period.
If such risks materialize, the monetary policy response will ensure to keep the possible deterioration in inflation expectations and the pricing behavior under control.
The improvement in the risk appetite due to the postponed normalization of monetary policy across advanced economies has provided a partial boost for portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Developments in domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in inflation indicators.
However, higher food and import prices and the elevated course of inflation expectations point to continued risks to price stability.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement, and kept the one-week repo auction rate, i.e.
the policy rate, unchanged at 24%.
The Committee, at its meeting, evaluated the medium-term projections that are envisaged to be included in the April Inflation Report.
Projections are based on an outlook in which the 2 country risk premium that has increased in recent weeks due to geopolitical factors and uncertainties would recover in response to a partial normalization of those factors as well as to a tight monetary policy stance and the inflation-focused macro-policy mix.
In the event that the recovery of the risk premium and financial volatility indicators are delayed, inflation and exchange rate expectations may hamper the disinflation process.
Factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and monetary stance will be determined to keep inflation in line with the targeted path.
In May, consumer prices were up by 0.95% and inflation decreased by 0.79 points to 18.71%.
In this period, annual inflation remained flat in the services group while it decreased in food, energy and core goods groups.
Annual food inflation declined, led by fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
While energy group inflation posted a mild monthly increase, it recorded an annual decline due to the base effect.
The slowdown in core goods inflation continued across subgroups.
Despite the ongoing deceleration in annual inflation of core inflation indicators, the underlying trend recorded a moderate increase.
In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual unprocessed food inflation declined to 35.33% from 45.69% due to fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
Processed food prices, on the other hand, posted a significant month-on-month increase in response to the effect of cumulative cost increases on prices.
In May, while energy prices increased by 0.25%, the decline in the municipal water tariff contained a further rise in prices.
The effect of the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira on fuel prices remained limited due to the implementation of the sliding scale tariff.
In May, annual core goods inflation decreased by 0.86 points to 16.59%, underpinned by declines across all subgroups.
The clothing group price hikes, which had remained below seasonal averages in April, displayed a slightly similar trend in May.
Despite the inflationary impacts of the recent increase in exchange rates, the weak course of domestic demand is assessed to contribute to the deceleration in core goods inflation.
Annual services inflation remained flat at 15.15% in May while the underlying trend of services inflation increased.
The downward impact of the weak domestic demand on services inflation is believed to be restrained by the backward indexation behavior and elevated levels of inflation expectations as well as the accumulated cost increase in some items.
In the first quarter of 2019, the gross domestic product dropped by 2.6% in annual terms whereas it increased by 1.3% in quarterly terms.
The recovery in the first quarter was driven by domestic demand, led by the accommodative stance of the public sector.
Net exports did not contribute to quarterly growth but their strong contribution to annual growth continued.
Recently released data show that the rebalancing trend in the economy has continued.
A weaker public expenditure support and slower loan growth than in the first quarter as well as rising 1 financial volatility and risk premiums all weigh on domestic demand.
Accordingly, developments in domestic demand conditions support disinflation.
Despite recent signs of a global slowdown, particularly for the EU, external demand maintains its relative strength.
Thus, net exports are likely to provide a strong boost to annual growth and the current account balance is expected to maintain its improving trend.
The data for February 2019 suggest that services employment was up from the previous period whereas industrial and construction employment remained on the decline and unemployment continued to rise.
Global economic activity has lost further momentum due to more pronounced slowdown in the growth rates of both advanced and emerging economies.
The trade tension between the US and China, the more-than-expected deceleration in growth rates of advanced economies and fluctuations in financial markets of some emerging economies have led to higher uncertainty in global economic policies, which feed into the downside risks to global economic activity.
Supported also by the flat course of crude oil prices in a vast part of the April-May period, global inflation rates remained mild.
Although crude oil prices receded to a great extent amid global trade tensions and concerns over growth following the third week of May, it is considered that crude oil prices are likely to exhibit high fluctuation in the period ahead due to demand prospects and geopolitical risks.
Monetary policy outlook in advanced economies has eased since the previous MPC meeting.
However, the high uncertainty over global economic outlook and high volatility in financial markets may lead to a more volatile course in portfolio inflows to emerging economies.
In addition, ongoing geopolitical problems and country-specific fragilities are considered to be influential in portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Developments in domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy support disinflation.
In order to contain the risks to the pricing behavior and to reinforce the disinflation process, the Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance and keep the policy rate (one-week repo auction rate) constant at 24%.
The Committee keeps its evaluation that, if uncertainties stemming from geopolitical factors are eased, in response to the tight monetary policy stance and the inflation-focused macro- policy mix, the country risk premium would continue to decline, which would support the recovery of the economy.
Factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, monetary stance will be determined to keep inflation in line with the targeted path.
If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to 2 an adverse impact on the medium-term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be revised.
In June, consumer prices remained almost unchanged with a minimal rise of 0.03% and annual inflation decreased by 2.99 points to 15.72%.
In this period, annual inflation decreased across all subgroups, chiefly in the food group.
Annual food inflation declined on the back of the falling unprocessed food prices in tandem with the prospects for the vegetable products.
Energy prices decreased, contributing positively to consumer inflation.
Domestic demand developments and the effects of monetary tightening as well as the waning impacts of the cumulative depreciation supported the deceleration in annual inflation of core inflation indicators.
In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual inflation fell by 9.24 points to 19.20% in June.
Annual unprocessed food inflation declined to 15.31% due to vegetable prices and became the main driver of the slowdown in consumer inflation.
Processed food prices, on the other hand, posted a significant month-on-month increase also in June in response to the lagged effects of increases in costs on prices and annual inflation increased in this group.
In June, energy prices decreased by 1.04% due to the fall in municipal water tariffs and exchange rate developments, as well as fuel prices which declined amid falling oil prices.
In July, annual energy inflation is expected to rise depending on the adjustment in electricity prices.
In June, annual core goods inflation decreased by 1.80 points to 14.79%, underpinned by declines across all subgroups.
Despite the increase in automobile prices, the durable goods group registered a moderate price increase due to the effects of remaining subgroups, while the change in clothing prices continued to remain below seasonal averages.
The high base effect from the previous year coupled with the recent exchange rate developments and the sluggish domestic demand support the fall in core goods inflation.
On the other hand, annual core goods inflation is expected to rise temporarily in July due to the expiry of the provisional tax cuts in the furniture, white goods and automobile sectors.
Prices of services rose by 1.65% in June and the group’s annual inflation inched down by 0.23 points to 14.92%.
Annual inflation receded in the communication and other services groups, but increased in other subgroups.
In this period, the restaurants-hotels group saw price hikes both in catering and accommodation services on account of the vibrant tourism sector.
The uptick in the transport group inflation was led by intercity passenger transport prices.
Meanwhile, the underlying trend of services inflation displayed some increase on account of 1 the robust tourism demand.
In this period, the downward impact of the weak domestic demand on services inflation is believed to be restrained by the brisk tourism demand, cumulative cost increase in some items, real unit labor costs and the backward indexation behavior.
Recently-released data indicate a moderate recovery in the economic activity.
Industrial production recorded a month-on-month increase in May, and maintained the trend of recovery in the April-May period with an uptick by 1.7%.
This outlook is preserved even when other transport vehicles that stimulate industrial production are excluded.
The unfavorable outlook in the survey data of April-May was replaced by recovery in June.
Thus, survey indicators such as the manufacturing industry capacity utilization ratio and the PMI- production recorded an increase in the second quarter.
On the other hand, the services sector also exhibits improvements, while the construction sector still remains sluggish.
Goods and services exports continue to display an upward trend despite the weakening in the global economic outlook, due to improved competitiveness.
In particular, strong tourism sector supports economic activity through direct and indirect channels.
Despite recent signs of a partial global slowdown, particularly for the European Union (EU), external demand maintains its relative strength.
Notwithstanding the somewhat slowing exports to the EU in April-May, the seasonally-adjusted non-gold export quantity index continued to rise quarter- on-quarter amid strong exports to other regions.
In the same period, the number of foreign visitors and travel and transport revenues remained on a firm uptrend while exports of services continued to boost growth.
Economy-wide spillovers from the robust tourism industry through sectors such as nondurable goods production, clothing in particular, and transport services help offset part of the weak domestic demand caused by the dim labor and credit markets outlook.
The composition of growth is having a positive impact on the external balance.
Firms’ orientation towards external markets due to subdued domestic demand, and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods; the lagged effects of exchange rates and the modest outlook for loans and economic activity restrain import demand, and external balance continues to improve at an accelerated pace thanks to the upbeat in tourism activity.
Thus, the current account balance is expected to maintain its improving trend.
Labor market data is relatively weak.
According to April 2019 data, nonfarm employment remains flat while nonfarm unemployment rate came to a halt.
Across sectors, industrial employment increased while services employment edged down and construction lost more jobs, compared to the previous period.
In sum, looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to economic growth and the gradual recovery is likely to continue with the help of the disinflation trend and the partial improvement in financial conditions.
Against this background, aggregate demand conditions are estimated to make a further contribution to disinflation.
Besides geopolitical developments, ongoing uncertainties over global economic activity pose a downside risk to growth via capital flows and foreign trade channels.
The persistent trade tension between the US and China, political uncertainties regarding the Brexit, and Middle East-based geopolitical developments cause the uncertainty over global economic policies to 2 remain elevated and the vulnerabilities in global financial markets to continue.
All these factors keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
The downside risks to future crude oil prices have intensified.
Despite OPEC’s decision in July to extend the production cuts, ongoing geopolitical problems across the world, and the slowing US shale oil production, the downside risks to crude oil prices have strengthened due to the high level of uncertainty over global trade and the unfavorable global economic outlook.
In addition, in spite of higher wages due to tight job markets in advanced economies, inflation remains moderate.
All in all, the global economic outlook appears to have fed into the downside risks to global inflation.
Recently, weaker global economic activity and heightened downside risks to inflation have strengthened the possibility of advanced economy central banks to take expansionary monetary policy steps.
These developments support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite, increasing the upward risks on portfolio flows to emerging markets.
On the other hand, rising protectionism and the uncertainty regarding global economic policies pose downside risks to these portfolio flows.
These factors are closely monitored in terms of their potential impacts on domestic economic activity and financial markets through both capital flows and international trade.
In the second quarter of the year, Turkey’s risk premium negatively diverged from other emerging market economies due to domestic uncertainties and geopolitical factors.
However, it has rapidly declined since mid-June owing to reduced uncertainties, the improvement in the outlook for global financial conditions as well as in macroeconomic indicators, and the tight monetary policy stance, while the volatility in financial markets has decreased.
On the other hand, the persistence of high levels of country risk premium and exchange rate volatility as well as the lingering global uncertainties and geopolitical risks keep the upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook alive.
In the second quarter of 2019, banks’ domestic funding conditions tightened, causing them to reflect the increased Turkish lira funding costs in loan rates.
Due to these developments and the expectations for the overall economic outlook, loan growth rates lost pace in this period.
A decrease in the degree of monetary policy tightness and the introduction of accommodative credit packages are deemed to be the factors that will support the normalization in credit conditions and credit demand in the upcoming period.
The speed, scope and sustainability of the normalization in credit conditions will be important for the economic activity outlook.
Despite the restrictive impact of domestic demand conditions on inflation, elevated levels of inflation continue to pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook in the upcoming period.
Anchoring inflation and exchange rate expectations is crucial for the effectiveness of monetary policy in the current period.
The course of food prices constitutes one of the risk factors that may affect the short-term inflation outlook.
While accumulated cost pressures keep the upside risks to processed food prices alive, they may also exert an additional pressure on catering services prices through periodic factors.
On the other hand, projections for unprocessed food inflation may be revised downwards depending on the future course of the correction in this group’s inflation driven by the increased supply of vegetables due to favorable weather conditions.
Against this background, the risks that the course of food prices may pose to the short-term inflation outlook are considered to be balanced.
The inflation outlook continued to improve.
In the second quarter, inflation displayed a significant fall with the contribution from a deceleration in unprocessed food and energy prices.
Domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy continue to support disinflation.
Underlying trend indicators, supply side factors, and import prices lead to an improvement in the inflation outlook.
In light of these developments, recent end-year inflation forecasts are slightly below the projections of the April Inflation Report.
Accordingly, considering all the factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 425 basis points.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is the key for achieving lower country risk premium, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
Keeping the disinflation process on track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance.
In this respect, the extent of the monetary tightness will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process.
The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.
The Committee maintains its assessment that the recent gradual improvement in the country risk premium will also continue in the upcoming period.
The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of price and financial stability objectives, taking into account all macroeconomic indicators including inflation and economic activity in particular.
In order to support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation- growth trade-off, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.
Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward indexation behavior.
Press Release on Summary of the .
In August, consumer prices rose by 0.86%, while annual inflation decreased by 1.64 points to 15.01%.
The fall in inflation was mainly driven by the core goods and energy groups, while the downtrend in annual food inflation continued.
In addition to the stable course of the Turkish lira, improved inflation expectations, commodity prices, and domestic demand conditions supported the decline in the annual inflation of core indicators.
Against this background, core indicators maintained their mild course.
Inflation will register a significant fall in September due also to the high base from the previous year.
In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual inflation fell by 0.99 points to 17.22% in August.
In this period, annual inflation lost pace both in unprocessed and processed food groups.
Monthly increases in processed food prices, which has surged since May due to the lagged cost effects, lost pace in August.
Leading indicators show that the slowdown in annual food inflation continues in September.
In August, energy prices rose by 0.34%.
In this period, the mild course of the Turkish lira and the decline in oil prices pulled fuel prices down, curbing the effect of the rise in natural gas prices.
Despite the upside impact of the adjustments in natural gas prices in September, annual energy inflation is projected to decline further due to the base effect.
Prices of tobacco products soared by 20.84%, adding 0.99 points to the group’s contribution to annual inflation.
In August, annual core goods inflation decreased by 4.79 points to 13.02%, mainly due to durables and other core goods, while annual inflation in the clothing group posted a limited rise.
Despite price increases in white goods, prices of durable goods registered a decline due to falling automobile prices.
Prices of other core goods have recorded a month-on-month decline, albeit limited, for the first time since June 2010.
The high base effect from the previous year accompanied by the recent exchange rate developments and the mild course of economic activity supports the fall in core goods inflation.
Services prices rose by 1.12% in August while annual services inflation inched down by 0.38 points to 14.19%.
Annual inflation declined in restaurants-hotels and communication groups whereas it remained flat in rents and transport groups and increased in the other services group.
The catering services-driven slowdown in the restaurants-hotels group is also attributed to the moderate course of food prices.
The other services group posted a large monthly increase that was mainly triggered by the rise in private university tuition fees.
Against this background, the underlying trend of services inflation displayed a modest deceleration.
In this period, the downward impact of domestic demand conditions on 1 services inflation is believed to have been restrained by cumulative cost increases in some items, real unit labor costs and the backward indexation behavior.
It is projected that there will be price increases in transport services in September due to urban transport fares.
Recently released data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues.
In July, industrial production increased month-on-month by 4.3% in seasonally and calendar- adjusted terms, showing that the decline observed in June due to the impact of the extended religious holiday was a temporary one.
This outlook is preserved even when the other transport vehicles sector, which has recently stimulated industrial production, is excluded.
Leading indicators point to a continued moderate recovery trend in the third quarter and to a partial improvement in the sectoral diffusion of economic activity.
Goods and services exports continue to display an upward trend despite the weakening in the global economic outlook, indicating improved competitiveness.
In particular, strong tourism revenues support the economic activity through direct and indirect channels.
Notwithstanding the somewhat slowing exports to the EU, the seasonally-adjusted non-gold export quantity index continued to rise amid strong exports to other regions.
Economy-wide spillovers from the robust course of tourism to sectors such as nondurable goods production, clothing in particular, and transport services help offset part of the weak domestic demand.
Firms’ orientation towards external markets due to the domestic demand outlook, and their flexibility in market diversification stimulate exports of goods.
The lagged effects of exchange rates and the modest outlook for loans and economic activity restrain import demand, and external balance continues to improve at an accelerated pace thanks to the upbeat in tourism activity.
According to May 2019 data, nonfarm employment declined while nonfarm unemployment rate rose compared to April figures.
Across sectors, industrial employment remained almost flat while employment in the services and construction sectors fell compared to the previous period.
In sum, looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to economic growth and the improvement in risk premium and financial conditions with the help of the disinflation trend is likely to support the gradual recovery.
Global economic activity lost further pace due to the deceleration in the euro area and China in particular, and leading indicators, primarily the manufacturing sector-related data, posted a decline, signaling that the deceleration will continue.
The persistent trade tensions between the US and China coupled with the possibility of protectionist measures spreading across other countries, a more apparent slowdown in the euro area, lingering uncertainties regarding the Brexit and other geopolitical developments cause the uncertainty over global 2 economic policies to remain elevated and the vulnerabilities in global financial markets to continue.
Commodity prices maintain their demand-driven decline due to the deceleration of global economic activity, supporting the disinflation in advanced and emerging economies.
Besides the slowdown in global economic activity, the increased excess supply in crude oil points to a moderate course in crude oil prices in the period ahead, yet geopolitical risks remain significant.
Recently, advanced economy central banks have started to adopt more expansionary policies as global economic activity weakened and downside risks to inflation heightened.
While these developments support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite, rising protectionism and uncertainty regarding global economic policies pose downside risks to these portfolio flows towards emerging markets.
These factors are closely monitored in terms of their potential impacts on financial markets and domestic economic activity through both capital flows and international trade.
Although Turkey’s risk premium dropped in the second half of June amid a cautious monetary stance, improved macroeconomic indicators and major central banks’ move to quantitative easing, it has been volatile since then.
The persistence of high levels of country risk premium and exchange rate volatility as well as ongoing global uncertainties and geopolitical risks keep the upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook alive.
July’s rate cut and expectations of further rate cuts thereafter helped bring loan and deposit rates markedly down from the previous MPC period.
Notwithstanding lower deposit rates, the stable Turkish lira and improved inflation expectations drove Turkish lira deposits higher.
Consumer loans have been on the rise amid accommodative credit packages and seasonal needs whereas commercial loan growth has been flat due to supply-side effects caused by expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as delayed loan demand and weak investments.
Improvement in the liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of banking sector and lower interest rates are likely to provide a boost to loan growth in the upcoming period.
The outlook for economic activity will largely depend on the pace, scope and sustainability of the normalization in credit conditions.
Despite the restrictive impact of domestic demand conditions on inflation, the current levels of inflation expectations continue to pose an upside risk to the medium-term inflation outlook.
Anchoring inflation expectations is crucial for a more effective monetary policy and a reduced inflation-growth tradeoff.
The accumulated cost effect on processed food prices have mostly terminated and prices in this group have posted a limited rise in August.
The unprocessed food inflation remains favorable.
In this framework, the risks that the course of food prices may pose to the short-term inflation outlook are lower than the July Inflation Report forecasts.
Domestic demand conditions and the level of monetary tightness continue to support disinflation.
In light of these developments, recent forecast revisions suggest that inflation is likely to materialize slightly below the projections of the July Inflation Report by the end of the year.
Accordingly, considering all the factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to reduce 3 the policy rate by 325 basis points.
At this point, the current monetary policy stance, to a large part, is considered to be consistent with the projected disinflation path.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is the key for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance.
The Committee emphasized the importance of sustaining the recent improvement in the country risk premium for the price and financial stability objectives.
In this context, in order to support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation-growth trade- off, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.
It should be emphasized that any new data or information may lead the Committee to revise its stance.
Committee Meeting 31 October 2019, No.
In September, consumer prices rose by 0.99%, while annual inflation decreased by 5.75 points to 9.26%.
In September, with the contribution of strong base effects, consumer inflation displayed a significant fall particularly in core goods and food inflation.
In addition to the stable course of the Turkish lira, improvement in inflation expectations and mild domestic demand conditions supported the disinflation in core indicators.
Against this background, core indicators B and C maintained their mild course.
In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual inflation fell by 7.70 points to 9.52% in September.
This fall was led by the favorable courses of unprocessed and processed food prices as well as the strong base effect.
The decline in inflation in fresh fruits and vegetables shaped the course of the unprocessed food inflation.
Meanwhile, processed food prices, on the other hand, displayed a moderate increase across the subcategories, excluding tea prices.
In September, energy prices rose by 3.17%, while annual energy inflation declined to 4.86% due to the base effect.
In this period, the impact of the adjustments in natural gas prices proved evident, and fuel prices also increased in tandem with the developments in the exchange rate and oil prices.
Meanwhile, the sliding scale system contained a worse outlook in fuel prices.
The course of energy prices in October will be shaped by the adjustment in electricity prices.
In September, annual core goods inflation decreased by 10.04 points to 2.98%, mainly due to the base effect.
Annual inflation declined in all subgroups, with durables and other core goods in the lead.
Despite price increases in white goods, prices of durable goods registered a slight month-on-month decline due to automobile prices.
Prices of other core goods recorded an increase after the decline in August.
Besides the strong base effect, the outlook of the Turkish lira and the mild course of domestic demand were influential in the course of core goods inflation in this period.
Services prices rose by 1.47% in September, while annual services inflation went down by 1.65 points to 12.54%.
Annual inflation increased in the transport group, but declined in the restaurants-hotels and other services groups due to the base effect and remained almost unchanged in the communication group and rent.
In transport services, price hikes particularly in urban transport fares (municipality bus, taxi, train etc.)
The downward impact of domestic demand conditions on services inflation have recently been restrained by real unit labor costs, cumulative cost increases in some items and the backward indexation behavior.
Recently obtained data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues.
While industrial production has been highly volatile due to working day effects associated with official holidays in recent months, its underlying trend has maintained a moderate pace of growth.
In August, the industrial production adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects decreased by 2.8% month-on-month.
Working day losses due to the bridging of the Feast of Sacrifice holiday with the weekend and the correction made in other transportation vehicles sector that is volatile in general limited the industrial production significantly in August.
In light of a technical recovery to be enabled by the removal of those effects peculiar to August and the favorable outlook in leading indicators, the September industrial production is expected to resume its monthly growth.
Leading indicators point to continuing improvement in the sectoral diffusion of economic activity.
While the weak labor market outlook and the expiry of tax cuts limited private consumption, the continued improvement in public expenditures and financial conditions underpinned the domestic demand.
Indicators such as the CBRT Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices hint at an ongoing improvement in the manufacturing industry and services activities.
Information obtained during the interviews conducted with firms in this period also gave similar signals regarding the economic activity.
Investments, on the other hand, remain weak despite showing signs of a slight recovery starting from the third quarter.
The recent slowdown in the global growth outlook, particularly in the EU, became more apparent.
While favorable effects of improved competitiveness prevail, weakening global economic outlook tempers external demand.
In the third quarter, the exports of goods and services contributed further to growth on the back of market diversity and the strong course in tourism, while the recovery in the domestic demand had implications on imports.
Looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to economic growth, although to a lesser extent, and the gradual recovery of the economy is likely to continue with the help of the disinflation trend and improvement in financial conditions.
In this context, the current account balance, which has recently recorded significant improvement due to the composition of growth, is expected to maintain a moderate course.
According to July 2019 data, nonfarm employment declined while nonfarm unemployment rate continued to rise compared to June figures.
Across sectors, industrial and services employment remained almost flat, while employment in the construction sector continued to fall compared to the previous period.
The weakening in global economic activity became more pronounced.
Protectionist trade policies and heightened geopolitical uncertainties have noticeably increased the uncertainty regarding global economic policies.
These developments keep downside risks to global economic activity alive and should be monitored closely in terms of their impacts on domestic growth via both capital flows and international trade channels.
The weak global economic activity depresses commodity prices and leads to a mild course in crude oil prices despite supply-side hurdles arising from geopolitical developments.
Accordingly, global inflation rates remain flat.
Recently, advanced economy central banks have been pursuing more expansionary policies as weakening global economic activity and downside risks to inflation became more evident.
On the other hand, rising protectionism and the uncertainty regarding global economic policies restrain capital flows to emerging markets and add to downside risks for the upcoming period.
Although Turkey’s risk premium dropped in September owing to a cautious monetary policy stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as major central banks’ move to expansionary policy stance, it has been up and volatile afterwards due to geopolitical tensions.
The elevated levels of the country risk premium and the exchange rate volatility amid global and geopolitical uncertainties keep upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook alive.
The strong rate cuts in July and September and expectations of further rate cuts thereafter helped bring loan and deposit rates further down.
Thus, TL-denominated commercial and consumer loan rates dropped significantly while improved financing conditions and growing domestic demand helped total loans, consumer loans in particular, gain momentum.
Consumer loans have seen an upswing since early August while commercial loans have been on a more modest rise.
This upturn can be attributed to supply-side effects caused by expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as delayed loan demand.
Moreover, as part of the scheme in which required reserves are being more flexibly and effectively used to support financial stability, the decision to decrease TL required reserve ratios and to raise the remuneration rate for TL required reserves for those banks having TL credit growth rates between 10-20 percent also contributed to the recovery in credit.
Improved liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of the banking sector and lower interest rates are likely to provide a boost to loan growth in the upcoming period.
In addition, NPLs and Stage 2 loans are monitored closely for any impact they might have on banks’ loan supply in the short term.
Employment and income developments will determine if the recent rate cut-driven rebound in loan demand will persist.
The pace, scope and sustainability of the normalization in credit conditions will be important for the outlook for economic activity.
Anchoring inflation expectations is crucial for a more effective monetary policy and a reduced inflation-growth trade-off.
Domestic demand conditions and the level of policy tightness continue to support disinflation.
In light of these developments, recent forecast revisions suggest that inflation is likely to materialize significantly below the projections of the July Inflation Report by the end of the year.
Accordingly, considering all the factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 250 basis points.
At this point, the current monetary policy stance, to a large extent, is considered to be consistent with the projected disinflation path.
Keeping the disinflation process on track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary policy stance.
The Central Bank will 3 continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability and financial stability objectives.
The Committee emphasized the importance of sustaining the improvement in the country risk premium for the price and financial stability objectives.
In this context, in order to support the effectiveness of the monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation-growth trade-off, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of the fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.
Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal policies into a sustained and systematic framework are expected to support the achievement of price stability.
Committee Meeting 19 December 2019, No.
In November, consumer prices increased by 0.38% while annual inflation rose by 2.01 points to 10.56%.
The rise in annual inflation was largely driven by the base effect recorded in the core goods group due to the temporary tax cuts in the same period of the previous year.
In this period, annual inflation increased in core goods, food, and energy groups while it remained relatively flat in the services group.
Although annual inflation in core indicators was up due to the base effect, the B and C indices maintained their mild trend thanks to the stable course of the Turkish lira, the improvement in inflation expectations, and the developments in domestic demand conditions and producer prices.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.04 points to 8.89% in November.
This rise was primarily driven by the unprocessed food group.
Unprocessed food prices displayed a favorable outlook in this period but annual inflation in this group increased due to the low base effect from last year.
Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in processed food prices somewhat accelerated.
This acceleration is also expected to continue in December, led by dairy products in line with the developments in purchasing prices of raw milk.
In November, energy prices were up by 0.55% while annual energy inflation increased by 1.34 points to 7.34%.
This increase was mainly due to the hikes in bottled gas and fuel prices driven by the rise in oil prices.
It should be noted that annual inflation in the energy group will be in an upward trend in the next two months due to the low base effects.
Annual core goods inflation surged by 4.65 points to 6.57% in this period due to the effect of the durable goods group in particular.
Although durable goods prices remained flat in November on the back of both the stable outlook in the Turkish lira and the moderate course of domestic demand conditions, annual inflation in this group posted a significant increase due to the low base effect stemming from the temporary tax cuts in the same period of the previous year.
While annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group remained almost flat at a low level, it slightly receded in the other core goods group.
The stable course of the Turkish lira and the current trend in producer prices favorably affect the short-term inflation outlook in the core goods group.
Services prices increased by 0.16% in November, and annual services inflation rose by 0.15 points to 12.16%.
While annual inflation remained flat in rents, it declined in the restaurants- hotels group and slightly increased in transport, communication and other services.
Monthly price hikes in catering services in the restaurants-hotels group significantly slowed down in line with the moderate course of food prices.
In this period, despite the curbing effects 1 driven by domestic demand and Turkish lira, services inflation remained elevated due to the backward-indexation behavior, real unit labor costs, and the lagged price hikes in the sub- items of administered transport services.
The improvement in inflation expectations continues.
The downtrend in 12-month ahead inflation expectations persists while the distribution of expectations implies an increased consensus among survey participants in December, which indicates that uncertainties regarding the medium-term inflation outlook has significantly decreased.
Recent data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by 0.9% in the third quarter of 2019, while the data adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects edged up by 0.4%.
Main driver of quarterly growth proved to be consumption expenditures.
Due to the robust increase in machinery-equipment investments, the downtrend in total investments came to a halt.
Although the uptrend in exports of goods and services remained intact, the contribution of net exports to annual and quarterly growth was negative due to the rebound in imports.
As risk premium, exchange rate volatility and uncertainties have declined, improved financial conditions and accelerated loans have supported domestic demand in the last quarter of the year.
Despite the weakness in the labor market, private consumption has been increasing on the back of postponed demand.
In addition, public expenditures continue to boost growth through the consumption channel.
Sectoral diffusion of economic activity continues to improve.
Although investment remains weak, survey indicators show that in addition to large firms in the manufacturing industry which have higher investment appetite, investment tendency in small and medium- sized firms have also started to recover after bottoming out.
The Committee emphasized the importance of stable growth and demand for a sustainable improvement in investment and employment.
In addition to the EU, MENA countries also signaled for a partial slowdown in this period.
While flexibility in market diversification and strong course in tourism support exports of goods and services, the recovery in domestic demand stimulates imports.
Against this background, in the last quarter of the year, it is expected that the contribution of net exports to economic growth will decline, and the current account balance, which has recently recorded significant improvement, will maintain a moderate course with the contribution of supportive policy measures.
Despite the rise in nonfarm employment in the third quarter, nonfarm unemployment rate continued to rise.
Compared to the second quarter, industrial employment remained flat in the third quarter, and services employment increased, while the downtrend in the construction employment continued, although to a lesser extent.
Leading indicators signal for a partial recovery in the labor market in the last quarter of the year.
In sum, in the upcoming period, as the contribution of net exports to economic growth declines, economic recovery is expected to be sustained with the help of the ongoing disinflation process and improvement in financial conditions.
Global economic activity continued to slow down in the third quarter of the year.
Leading indicators for the next quarter indicate that the ongoing global slowdown in the manufacturing industry might have also fed into the services sector.
These developments keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
The resulting likely effects on domestic growth are monitored closely.
Weak global economic activity depresses commodity prices and leads to a mild course in crude oil prices despite supply-side hurdles arising from geopolitical developments.
Weakness in global economic activity and low levels of global inflation strengthen expectations regarding the continuation of expansionary monetary policies in advanced economies.
The expectation that recently adopted accommodative stance of monetary policies in advanced economies, the US in particular, is likely to be maintained over a medium term horizon under current circumstances, and its implications for global financial conditions support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite.
Accordingly, amid recent positive expectations regarding a likely settlement of the trade tension between the US and China, global risk appetite has increased slightly compared to the previous meeting period and portfolio flows towards emerging economies have presented a more favorable outlook.
Meanwhile, rising protectionism and uncertainty regarding global economic policies are closely monitored in terms of their impact on both capital flows and international trade.
Turkey’s risk premium continued to decline owing to a cautious monetary policy stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as the accommodative monetary policy outlook in advanced economies.
The decline in the short-term exchange rate volatility has also become more pronounced following the previous meeting period.
However, possible upside effects of global and geopolitical uncertainties on the medium-term inflation outlook through country risk premium and exchange rate volatility channels will continue to be monitored closely.
The strong rate cuts since July and expectations of further rate cuts thereafter helped bring loan and deposit rates further down.
Thus, TL-denominated commercial and consumer loan rates dropped significantly due also to the improvement in inflation expectations, while improved financing conditions and growing domestic demand helped total loans, consumer loans in particular, accelerate.
Consumer loans have seen an upswing since early August while corporate loan growth gained pace with a lag.
This can be attributed to supply-side effects caused by expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as postponed loan demand.
The more flexible and effective use of required reserves as a countercyclical macroprudential tool in this period supports credit growth and financial stability.
In this context, firstly on 19 August 2019, Turkish lira reserve requirement ratios and the remuneration rate on Turkish lira denominated required reserves were linked to annual growth rates of Turkish lira cash credits.
Moreover, on 9 December 2019, considering the level of rebalancing in the economy, a new reserve requirement practice was introduced to channel credit supply towards production-oriented sectors rather than consumption.
Thus, long-term commercial loans that have a strong relation with production and investment and long-term mortgage loans that have a weak relation with imports will be encouraged.
In the upcoming period, with the improvement in liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of the banking sector, the fall 3 in interest rates and adjustments in required reserves are expected to further support credit growth.
Inflation outlook continued to improve while inflation expectations displayed a wide-spread decline.
Thanks to the stable course of the Turkish lira as well as the developments in domestic demand conditions and producer prices, core inflation indicators have displayed a mild trend.
The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and contributes to a benign outlook in cost factors.
Underlying trend indicators, supply side factors and import prices lead to an improvement in the inflation outlook.
In light of these developments, recent forecasts suggest that inflation is likely to materialize close to the lower bound of the October Inflation Report projections for the end of the year, with risks around the disinflation path for 2020 being balanced.
Accordingly, considering all the factors affecting inflation outlook, the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 200 basis points.
At this point, the current monetary policy stance is considered to be consistent with the projected disinflation path.
Press Release on the Summary of the .
In December, consumer prices increased by 0.74% while annual inflation rose by 1.28 points to 11.84%, slightly below the forecast presented in the October Inflation Report.
In this period, while annual inflation rose across subgroups, the rise in the services group remained more limited.
Energy inflation posted the most noticeable increase in December due to the low base effect from the same period last year.
Food inflation remained on the rise driven by both unprocessed and processed food subcategories.
Annual inflation in core goods increased due to cost factors as well as the low base effect from the same period last year.
Against this background, although annual inflation in core indicators was slightly up, B and C indices maintained their mild trend.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 2.00 points to 10.89% in December.
This rise was mainly driven by price movements in the processed food group.
While price developments in dairy products were noticeable following the increases in purchasing prices of raw milk, the recent uptrend in bread and cereals prices continued.
The rise in unprocessed food inflation in December was mainly driven by the other unprocessed food group, while inflation in fresh vegetables and fruits posted a limited increase and remained low at the year-end.
Leading indicators signal that despite significant increases in vegetable prices, unprocessed food inflation may slow down in January due to the base effect.
Energy prices inched up by 0.16%, while annual energy inflation increased by 3.64 points to 10.98% due to base effects in December.
This increase is attributed to the hikes in bottled gas and fuel prices driven by the rise in oil prices and the recent exchange rate developments.
The sliding-scale tariff in fuel prices and the decline in municipal water prices limited a more adverse outlook in energy prices.
It should be noted that annual inflation in the energy group will also rise significantly in January due to base effects.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.91 points to 7.48% in December, partly due to the low base effect from the same period last year.
In this period, annual inflation increased in clothing and durable goods but slightly decreased in other core goods.
The increase in durable goods prices is attributable to depreciation of the Turkish lira.
Although clothing and footwear prices posted a more limited decline compared to seasonal averages in December, annual inflation in this group remained significantly low.
All in all, the trend of core goods inflation remained almost flat.
Services prices increased by 0.37% in December, and annual services inflation rose by 0.14 points to 12.30%.
Annual inflation increased slightly in communication and other services, 1 but declined in transport services and remained almost flat in restaurants-hotels services and rents.
The underlying trend of services inflation also inched down.
In the upcoming period, the real unit labor costs stemming from minimum wage developments, the tourism demand and the backward-indexation behavior are envisaged to shape the outlook for services prices.
The downtrend in the medium-term inflation expectations continues to be widespread and the distribution of expectations implies an increased consensus among survey participants, which indicates that uncertainties regarding the medium-term inflation outlook have significantly decreased.
Industrial production posted a month-on-month increase in November and remained on a path of recovery with a rise of 0.7% in the October-November period compared to the previous quarter.
Underlying trend in industrial production is stronger after adjusting for temporary fluctuations in sectors with high historical volatility.
Survey indicators and foreign trade data indicate that the uptrend in industrial production will continue in December as well.
The decline in risk premium and exchange rate volatility as well as the improvement in financial conditions supported domestic demand considerably in the last quarter.
In addition, public expenditures continued to boost growth through the consumption channel.
Survey indicators such as the CBRT Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices hint at an ongoing increase in the manufacturing industry and services activities.
Although investment remains weak, tendencies for investment and employment including that of small and medium-sized firms are recovering.
In addition to the EU, signals for a slowdown in MENA countries increased in this period.
Against this background, in the last quarter of the year, it is expected that the contribution of net exports to economic growth will decline, and the current account balance, which has recently recorded a significant improvement, will maintain a moderate course with the contribution of supportive policy measures.
The labor market data for the October period indicate an increase in nonfarm employment including the construction sector as well, and a decline in the unemployment rate.
Compared to the previous period, industrial and construction employment posted an upsurge, while the rise in services employment remained limited.
Leading indicators signal that the partial improvement in unemployment rates continues, while the weakness in the labor market prevails.
Global economic activity remains weak in both advanced and emerging market economies.
The Phase 1 trade deal between the US and China partially improved the expectations that global trade tensions could ease.
Nevertheless, with high tariffs still in place, many issues unresolved and uncertainty over the fulfillment of commitments, trade disputes keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
Crude oil prices have been more volatile and risen significantly since the previous MPC meeting due to recent geopolitical developments.
However, sluggish global economic activity weighs on commodity prices.
Thus, after an uptick in the fourth quarter, global headline inflation is expected to remain flat in 2020.
The expectation that recently adopted accommodative stance of monetary policies in advanced economies, the US in particular, is likely to be maintained over a medium term horizon under current circumstances, and its implications for global financial conditions have paved the way for expansionary policies in emerging market economies as well.
Current global financial conditions and the recent partial improvement in expectations regarding global trade support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite.
Accordingly, portfolio flows towards emerging economies have presented a more favorable outlook compared to the previous meeting period.
Nevertheless, rising protectionism, uncertainty regarding global economic policies and geopolitical developments are closely monitored for their impact on capital flows, international trade and commodity prices.
Turkey’s country risk premium continued to decline owing to a cautious monetary policy stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as the accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies.
However, upside risks regarding global and geopolitical uncertainties on the medium-term inflation outlook through country risk premium and exchange rate volatility channels will continue to be monitored closely.
The strong rate cuts since July, lower inflation expectations and improved banking liquidity helped bring loan and deposit rates further down.
Thus, TL-denominated loans, consumer loans in particular, remained on the rise thanks to improved financing conditions and recovering domestic demand.
This rise can be attributed to supply-side effects caused by expectations for the overall economic outlook as well as postponed loan demand and loan restructuring.
The aim of the reserve requirement practice introduced on 9 December 2019 was to channel credit supply towards production-oriented sectors rather than consumption and encourage the use of long-term commercial loans that have a strong relation with production and investment, and long-term mortgage loans that have a weak relation with imports.
In the upcoming period, with the improvement in liquidity and capital adequacy ratios of the banking sector, the fall in interest rates and adjustments in required reserves are expected to further support credit growth.
Employment and income developments will determine the persistence of recent rate cut-driven rebound in loan demand.
The pace, scope and 3 sustainability of normalization in credit conditions will be important for the outlook for economic activity.
Inflation outlook continued to improve and inflation expectations sustained their wide- spread decline.
The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and helps contain cost pressures.
Developments in the exchange rate, domestic demand conditions and producer prices have contributed to a mild trend in core inflation indicators.
The course of inflation is considered to be broadly in line with the year-end inflation projection.
Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to make a measured cut in the policy rate.
At this point, the current monetary policy stance remains consistent with the projected disinflation path.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
In this respect, monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process.
Committee Meeting 26 February 2020, No.
In January, consumer prices rose by 1.35%, while annual inflation increased by 0.31 points to 12.15%.
Annual inflation declined across the main groups excluding energy, and the surge in energy inflation stemmed from the low base from the same period of the previous year.
In this period, B and C indicators recorded a relatively flat annual inflation, but a slight increase in trends.
In January, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages fell by 1.85 points to 9.04%.
Led by fresh fruits and vegetables, unprocessed food prices surged on a seasonal basis, yet the group’s annual inflation dropped due to the high base, limiting the food inflation.
Meanwhile, processed food prices remained on an upward track in January, driven mainly by the bread-cereals and dairy products.
Energy prices rose by 1.11% in January.
Annual energy inflation rose by 6.16 points to 17.14% due to the low base effect led by the reduced prices in electricity, natural gas and municipal water in the same period of the previous year.
Monthly price increases were shaped by the rise in municipal water tariffs and increased fuel prices due to exchange rate developments notwithstanding the fall in international oil prices.
Leading indicators for February signal that the group’s annual inflation will decline due to fuel prices.
Meanwhile, in February, tobacco prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group registered a decline.
Annual core goods inflation decreased by 0.13 points to 7.35% in January.
In this period, annual inflation dropped in durable goods, rose in clothing and footwear group and remained flat in other core goods.
The VAT reduction in furniture products was largely transmitted into prices, pulling down the prices of durable goods in January.
All in all, the underlying trend of core goods inflation remained mild.
Services prices increased by 2.00% and annual services inflation inched down to 12.20% in January.
In this period, annual inflation declined in rents, transport services and communication but crept up in restaurants-hotels and remained relatively flat in other services.
According to the monthly price developments, price hikes seen in the other services group items that are inclined to backward-indexation, that reflect the exchange rate effect, and whose prices are set according to the re-valuation rate were noteworthy.
The underlying trend of services inflation increased slightly in this period.
Recent data indicate that recovery in economic activity continues.
Industrial production posted a month-on-month surge in December and rose by 1.5% compared to the previous quarter.
Survey indicators signal that the strong course in production will also continue in January.
The decline in risk premium, fading uncertainties and the rebound in loans support domestic demand, and the sectoral diffusion of economic activity continues to improve.
Despite signs of recovery due to falling loan rates and improving prospects for the overall economy, investment and employment remain weak.
The Committee emphasized the importance of growth and demand stability for a sustainable improvement in investment and employment.
The European region’s PMI indicators have recently signaled a partial improvement in the growth outlook, with Germany and the UK in the lead.
In addition to this improvement in external demand, new market gains also affected exports positively.
However, the re-emergence of downside risks to global growth due to the epidemic in China raises the uncertainties over the external demand outlook.
Meanwhile, the recovery in domestic demand stimulates imports and the contribution of net exports to economic growth declines.
Although the current account balance follows a moderate course, the effect of the developments in the demand composition and the epidemic are monitored closely.
The recovery in labor market continues as the economic activity grows stronger.
Compared to the previous period, non-agricultural employment increased driven by industrial sector in November period and unemployment rates continued to decrease.
The leading indicators signal that the decline in unemployment rates continued in the first quarter of 2020 as well.
In sum, as the contribution of net exports to economic growth declines, economic recovery is expected to be sustained with the help of the ongoing disinflation process and improvement in financial conditions.
Weakness in global economic activity continues both in advanced and emerging economies.
Global economic activity presents a favorable outlook on the back of the favorable developments towards settlement of trade tensions between the US and China, dissipating Brexit-related uncertainties and the ongoing accommodative stance in global monetary policies.
Nevertheless, aggravated geopolitical tensions in January, social unrest in some emerging markets, drought in the southern hemisphere and concerns over the epidemic that broke out in China keep downside risks to global economic activity in place.
The likely impact of the listed factors on domestic growth are closely monitored.
Weak global economic activity coupled with more apparent downside risks repress commodity prices and lead to a mild course in oil prices despite supply-side problems stemming from geopolitical developments.
In this respect, global inflation is expected to remain flat in 2020.
On the other hand, recently elevated uncertainties regarding global economic outlook lead to volatility in the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite.
The cautious monetary policy stance, the improvement in macroeconomic indicators, and accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies have positively affected Turkey’s country risk premium.
However, upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook that may be triggered by global and geopolitical uncertainties through the country risk premium and exchange rate volatility channels will continue to be monitored closely.
Nevertheless, developments in credit growth and its composition are closely monitored for their impact on external balance and inflation.
Going forward, sustaining a moderate course in the current account balance, which has recently recorded significant improvement, is considered as a crucial element of the macroeconomic policy mix.
Accordingly, the Committee assessed that macroprudential measures addressing credit growth and its composition might be reviewed to safeguard the achievements in the current account balance for price stability and financial stability objectives.
In addition, non-performing loans and Stage 2 loans are monitored closely for any impact they might have on banks’ loan supply in the short term.
Employment and income developments will determine the persistence of recent rate cut- driven rebound in loan demand.
The pace, scope and sustainability of normalization in credit conditions will be important for the outlook for economic activity.
Inflation expectations remain favorable.
Developments in inflation expectations, domestic demand conditions and producer prices have contributed to a mild trend in core inflation indicators.
Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to make a more measured cut in the policy rate.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
In order to support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation-growth trade-off, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.
Accordingly, the monetary policy stance assumes that administered price and tax adjustments are formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward- indexation behavior.
Committee Meeting 24 March 2020, No.
In February, consumer prices rose by 0.35% and annual inflation increased by 0.22 points to 12.37%.
The rise in annual inflation of both unprocessed and processed food groups constituted the main factor that drove up consumer inflation.
The fall in international oil prices triggered a decrease in fuel prices, leading to a decline in annual energy inflation.
Services inflation slightly increased in February while core goods inflation remained mild.
Against this background, annual inflation in B and C indicators rose moderately but they maintained a relatively flat trend.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.54 points to 10.58% in February.
Led by fresh fruits-vegetables and red meat, unprocessed food prices surged on a seasonal basis.
Although annual inflation in this group was driven up by this surge, it remained at historically low levels.
The recent strong uptrend in processed food prices somewhat weakened in February, and annual processed food inflation increased to a limited extent.
Bread and cereals continued to be the main driver of this increase, followed by fats and oils as well as meat products.
Energy prices dropped by 0.63% in February, and annual energy inflation decreased by 1.60 points to 15.54%.
This was mainly driven by fuel prices that dropped due to the fall in international oil prices notwithstanding the depreciation in the exchange rate.
Leading indicators for March signal that energy prices will decline on a monthly basis, and annual energy inflation will significantly decrease due to base effects as well.
In February, annual core goods inflation fell by 0.30 points to 7.05%.
In this period, annual inflation remained flat in clothing and footwear group while it slightly decreased in durable goods and other core goods.
Durable goods prices declined in February, with continued impact of the VAT reduction in furniture.
On the other hand, gold prices rose due to exchange rate effects and international developments, keeping annual inflation in this group elevated.
Prices of services rose by 0.84% in February and annual services inflation increased by 0.29 points to 12.49%.
In this period, annual inflation was up in transport, rents and other services and flat in restaurants-hotels and communication.
Among other services, the increases in maintenance-repair, healthcare services and package tours stand out, all of which are highly sensitive to exchange rate changes, while prices for recreation and culture services also saw a notable increase.
Services inflation will likely be determined by real unit labor costs and backward indexation in the upcoming period, whereas, the measures taken to offset the 1 economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak and weakened demand conditions will put some restraint on services inflation through related sectors.
Inflation expectations remained moderate in March, and the distribution of expectations pointed at a strengthened consensus among survey participants.
GDP data for the fourth quarter of 2019 suggested that economic activity strengthened on the back of domestic demand thanks to improving financial conditions and accelerating loans.
In this period, private consumption spending remained on the rise while public spending continued to be supportive through the consumption channel.
Investments remained weak, some recovery notwithstanding.
Meanwhile, despite continued increase in exports, net exports made a negative contribution to annual and quarterly growth due to rising imports.
Current data suggest that economic activity remains robust for the January-February period, and its sectoral diffusion continues to improve.
The acceleration in loans buoyed up domestic demand, while investments and employment showed signs of recovery but nevertheless remained weak.
Favorable effects of improved competitiveness and the partial recovery in global growth helped exports remain on the rise through January and February.
On the other hand, import demand continued to surge due to the outlook in loans and domestic demand.
As of March, the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic has begun to weigh on economic activity through foreign trade, tourism and domestic demand channels.
Contracted global trade volume and restricted travel rights confine exports and transportation activities.
Moreover, possible effects of aggravated uncertainties and volatility in the financial markets on the domestic demand are monitored closely.
Despite the deceleration in exports and tourism revenues, the sizeable decline in energy prices in the upcoming period is likely to cause the current account balance to follow a mild course.
In the December period, the fall in unemployment rates continued with the decline in the participation rate.
The partial recovery in construction employment continued compared to the previous period, whereas industrial employment receded, and services employment remained flat.
While leading indicators show that unemployment rates will decline further in the first quarter, outlook in the labor market amid the limiting effects of the pandemic on economic activity is closely monitored.
The fast spread of the pandemic on a global scale aggravates uncertainties and deteriorates global growth prospects.
Global monetary policies grew more supportive of economic activity within the scope of emergency measures to minimize the financial and economic impacts of the pandemic.
While central banks in advanced and emerging economies have taken coordinated expansionary measures, comprehensive sets of fiscal policy measures have been introduced in many countries to support households and firms.
Meanwhile, persisting financial volatilities and measures to slowdown the spread of the disease weigh on aggregate demand conditions on a global scale.
Impacts of these factors on domestic growth, especially through exports, tourism and related sectors are monitored closely.
Monetary policy instruments could be readjusted depending on the size and persistence of the effects of 2 measures, such as travel restrictions and uncertainties, on economic activity and labor market through the domestic demand channel.
Along with the downturn in global economic activity that limits the demand for commodities, increased volatility in financial markets led to plummeting prices in commodities, with crude oil and metals in the lead.
Moreover, supply-side effects driven by disagreements among oil exporters regarding the amount of oil production keep crude oil prices subsided.
Against this background, and also with the weakening global growth outlook, global inflation rates are expected to be lower in 2020.
Meanwhile, heightened uncertainties regarding the recent coronavirus outbreak and the liquidity crunch caused a sharp downturn in global equity and bond yields as well as a decline in risk appetite and the demand for emerging market financial assets.
The evolving global impact of the pandemic disease on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices as well as policy actions taken towards limiting this impact are closely monitored.
In the period preceding the coronavirus outbreak, Turkey’s macroeconomic indicators improved significantly.
A sustained fall in inflation and a sizable adjustment in the current account were achieved.
The recovery of economic activity became stronger along with the improvement in financial conditions.
In this period, foreign currency indebtedness of nonfinancial firms decreased; liquidity and capital buffers of the banking sector strengthened.
The achievements of the rebalancing process have increased the resilience of the Turkish economy against unfavorable shocks.
Nevertheless, the increase in financial volatility and expected slowdown in aggregate demand are closely monitored for their impact on firms’ cash flows and balance sheets.
Accordingly, necessary measures will continue to be taken in coordination with other policies.
In order to contain negative effects of the coronavirus pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial markets, the credit channel and firms’ cash flows.
Accordingly, with an aim to support financial stability, the Central Bank implemented a comprehensive set of measures.
With the objective of containing possible adverse effects of the global uncertainty led by the coronavirus pandemic on the Turkish economy, the CBRT has announced a series of measures aiming at (i) enhancing predictability by providing banks with flexibility in Turkish lira and foreign exchange liquidity management, (ii) offering targeted additional liquidity facilities to banks to secure uninterrupted credit flow to the corporate sector, (iii) boosting cash flow of exporting firms through arrangements on rediscount credits.
Additionally, considering that downside risks to the year-end inflation projection increased, the Committee decided to cut the policy rate by 100 basis points.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, the sharp fall in international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affects inflation outlook favorably.
Furthermore, due to the weakening in global trade and measures such as travel restrictions, the disinflationary effect of aggregate demand conditions has increased to some extent.
The policy rate cut, along with other measures taken, is expected to contribute to ensuring healthy functioning of financial markets and supporting the cash flow of the corporate sector.
The Committee assessed that it is essential to sustain the coordination between monetary and fiscal policies to minimize the pandemic disease-related economic risks.
The multifaceted effects of the pandemic on the economy call for coordinated policy actions aiming particularly at smoothing cash flows and stabilizing employment in order to minimize the impact on firms and households.
Therefore, it is considered to be of critical importance that macro-scale monetary and fiscal policies are complemented with policy measures that target the most-affected economic units also by considering sectoral interactions.
Meanwhile, ensuring that policy measures are designed in a targeted and temporary fashion would support policy effectiveness.
Committee Meeting 30 April 2020, No.
In March, consumer prices increased by 0.57% while annual inflation dropped by 0.51 points to 11.86%.
Food and energy groups constituted the main drivers of the fall in consumer inflation.
Despite the depreciation in the Turkish lira, fuel prices decreased on the back of the fall in international oil prices, and annual energy inflation declined significantly.
Meanwhile, the deceleration in food inflation was driven by fresh fruit-vegetable prices.
Inflation slightly decreased in services whereas it rose in core goods group due to exchange rate developments.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages declined by 0.53 points to 10.05% in March.
Annual unprocessed food inflation was driven down by fresh fruit-vegetable prices but it rose when this item is excluded.
This rise was led by meat prices, followed by increases in prices of pulses.
On the other hand, annual inflation in the processed food group increased slightly.
While inflation in the bread and cereals group remained elevated, other groups driving processed food inflation up were fats and oils as well as non-alcoholic beverages due to the tax increase in this group.
Energy prices fell by 3.12% in March, and annual energy inflation dropped by 5.73 points to 9.81%.
This fall was mainly led by fuel prices that decreased in tandem with international oil prices.
Leading indicators suggest that the marked decline in annual energy inflation will continue in April.
In March, annual core goods inflation rose by 1.13 points to 8.18%.
While this rise was observed across all subcategories, it was more pronounced in durable goods inflation.
The rise in durable goods prices was predominantly driven by the increases in automobile and furniture prices caused by the depreciation in the Turkish lira, while the seasonal price increase in the clothing and footwear group was somewhat stronger compared to the previous year.
Services prices were up by 0.52% in March, and annual services inflation decreased by 0.07 points to 12.42%.
In this period, annual inflation slightly rose in transport and restaurants- hotels groups and remained flat in rents and communication, whereas it decelerated in other services group.
Among other services, monthly inflation in package tour, maintenance-repair, and recreation and culture services recorded a weak course due to the measures taken against the coronavirus pandemic.
Health services prices in this group remained on the rise due to exchange rate developments as well.
The pandemic also had an impact on the restaurants-hotels group as inflation in this group was contained by the decrease in 1 accommodation services prices despite the rise in prices of food and beverage services driven by cost hikes.
The improvement in year-end inflation expectations continued in April.
However, the inflation forecast uncertainty moderately increased due to uncertainties regarding the course of the pandemic.
Accordingly, in 12-month-ahead inflation expectations, probabilities assigned to extreme values in either direction slightly increased.
Having displayed a strong upward trend in January and February, thanks to the improvement in financial conditions, economic activity has started to weaken in mid-March due to the effects of the coronavirus pandemic on external trade, tourism and domestic demand.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data point that this weakening trend has become pronounced in April, spreading across all sectors.
The weakening in services, particularly in tourism-related sectors, has been more accentuated.
In the manufacturing industry, orders and capacity utilization rates of main exporting sectors dropped to substantially low levels due to the sharp decline in external demand.
Meanwhile, food, paper products, computer and electronic goods, and basic pharmaceutical industries, which periodically record comparatively strong demand, diverge positively in relative terms.
Export and tourism revenues are on the decline due to the deterioration in the global growth outlook and travel restrictions.
While tourism and related transportation activities have come to a halt, export opportunities are significantly shrinking in motor vehicles, wearing apparel, textile, leather, machinery-equipment, and electrical equipment sectors for which the European region is the main market.
On the other hand, import demand is decreasing at a rapid pace in line with the deceleration in economic activity while low levels of commodity prices are restraining the import bill.
Against this background, current account balance, which recently recorded significant improvement, is expected to follow a moderate course throughout the year due to the restraining effects of commodity prices and imports.
The Committee assesses that the unfavorable effects of the pandemic are temporary and the economy’s recovery, which is expected to be sooner and stronger for domestic demand, will start as of the second half of the year.
The pace of the recovery in economic activity will depend on the course of the normalization process in Turkey as well as in the global economy, particularly in our foreign trade partners.
Accordingly, to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial markets, the credit channel and firms’ cash flows.
In this respect, recent monetary and fiscal measures will contribute to financial stability and post-pandemic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy.
In the January period, the fall in unemployment rates continued while non-farm employment slightly declined led by the industrial sector.
Leading indicators suggest that the slowdown in economic activity started to have its impact on the labor market as of mid-March.
The Committee assessed that subsidies provided through the unemployment insurance fund and current transfers, short-time work allowance in particular, have played a critical role in limiting the income loss of households and maintaining employment.
The coronavirus-led global economic downturn is deepening.
Measures to contain the contagion first affected supply chains and production, but demand has also weakened significantly amid heightened uncertainty, tight financial conditions, reduced household 2 income and worsening cash flows of businesses as the outbreak evolved into a global pandemic.
Substantial economic measures are introduced to avoid any permanent damage to employment, supply chains and output capacity.
Central banks in advanced and emerging economies continue adopting expansionary policies, and rate cuts, asset purchases, liquidity measures and credit support programs are among the foremost monetary responses to the pandemic.
On the fiscal front, spending, tax and credit-related measures have been in place to support the hardest hit sectors and lay out the foundation for a post-pandemic recovery.
The effectiveness of these policies for financial markets, growth and employment will depend on how fast the pandemic is contained in each country and how much policy room they have.
There remain uncertainties regarding the global and domestic pace of the virus’ spread and the normalization process.
In this regard, it is still unclear how long the measures taken to prevent the spread of the virus such as travel restrictions, lockdowns and social isolation will last, timing of these measures and how much they will affect consumer behavior and buying habits.
A prolonged normalization phase could translate into a much weaker global and domestic growth outlook, calling for additional response measures.
Crude oil demand has decreased significantly as economic activity is grinding to a halt across many industries around the globe.
While global crude oil inventories are at record-high levels, oil output reductions may still fall short of the decline in demand.
Thus, there remain demand-led downside risks to crude oil prices.
Amid plunging global demand as well as falling commodity prices, global inflation rates are expected to be moderate throughout 2020.
The weakening global risk appetite caused significant rise in financial market volatility.
Stock and bond markets in advanced and emerging economies have recently seen major volatility.
As substantial capital outflows were observed in emerging economies, Turkey’s country risk premium increased, Turkish lira depreciated, and exchange rate volatility rose in line with the overall trend.
Once uncertainty about the pandemic declines, the negative impact of global developments on country risk premium and exchange rate volatility will likely fade, also with the help of monetary and fiscal policy measures.
As uncertainty still reigns, the pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices.
Thus, the CBRT will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.
Before the outbreak, financial conditions have improved considerably thanks to falling inflation and rate cuts, and loan growth has accelerated since the third quarter of 2019.
Having lost momentum due to macroprudential measures in the first months of 2020, consumer loan growth has slowed further since mid-March when the first coronavirus case was reported.
On the other hand, commercial loans remained on the rise in the first quarter.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures introduced to address the pandemic as well as the expansion of loan supply, mostly by state-owned banks, seem to have mitigated downside risks to loan growth and contributed to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector.
In this regard, the Bank will continue to monitor the credit market closely and implement necessary measures to ensure that the credit channel functions smoothly.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, continued sharp decline in international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affects the inflation outlook 3 favorably.
While the rise in unit costs resulting from declining production and sales is closely monitored, the disinflationary effects of aggregate demand conditions are estimated to have increased.
In this respect, it is considered that risks to the year-end inflation projection presented in the January Inflation Report are on the downside.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to make a 100 basis point cut in the policy rate.
The Committee assessed that it is essential to sustain the coordination between monetary and fiscal policies to minimize the pandemic-related economic risks.
Therefore, it is considered to be of critical importance that macro-scale monetary and fiscal policies be complemented with policy measures that target the most- affected economic units also by considering sectoral interactions.
In April, consumer prices increased by 0.85% while annual inflation dropped by 0.92 points to 10.94%.
The energy group was the main driver of the fall in consumer inflation, whereas the food group hindered a more positive outlook.
Energy prices fell further on the back of international oil prices, but food prices increased above seasonal trends.
The fall in services inflation spread across subcategories, and annual core goods inflation lost momentum despite the exchange rate developments.
Against this background, annual inflation and the trends of B and C indicators posted a decline.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.23 points to 11.28% in April.
Price increases spread across the unprocessed food group, while red meat as well as pulses with high dependency on foreign trade stood out.
The uptrend in processed food prices continued in April.
Inflation in the bread and cereals group remained elevated, while fats-oils and non-alcoholic beverages also drove processed food inflation upwards.
Prospects for food inflation were shaped by a set of factors such as pandemic-related impacts, the current demand increase as well as tax adjustments and exchange rate developments.
Leading indicators suggest that the rise in annual food inflation will continue in May due to unprocessed food prices.
Energy prices fell by 4.99% in April, and annual energy inflation declined by 6.51 points to 3.30%.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira notwithstanding, falling international oil prices remained as the determining factor.
Leading indicators suggest a slight rise in annual energy inflation in May.
Meanwhile, due to the raised minimum lump sum special consumption tax, it is projected that cigarette prices will edge up in May, yet annual inflation in this group will decline further due to the base effect.
In April, annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.30 points to 7.88%.
In this period, annual inflation remained relatively flat in durable goods, and decreased in other subcategories.
In the durable goods group, the automobile and furniture items stood out with an upsurge in prices following the depreciation in the Turkish lira, while the seasonal price increase in the clothing and footwear group proved quite limited compared to previous years.
Services prices inched up by 0.22% in April, and annual services inflation decreased by 0.66 points to 11.76%.
In this period, consequences of the pandemic became quite apparent on services prices.
Annual inflation receded in all subcategories, and the most pronounced 1 decline was seen in the restaurants-hotels and transport services groups, the operations of which were interrupted.
In April, communication services recorded falling prices, while increases in rents slowed further.
Meanwhile, prices in maintenance-repair services posted a high-rated increase due to exchange rate developments.
Inflation expectations improved further in May with a decline across all horizons.
The industrial production index posted a month-on-month decline by 7.1% in March in seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms, but remained flat on a quarterly basis.
An analysis of sectoral breakdown reveals substantial decreases in production of export-oriented sectors such as manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel, computer-electronic and optical products, motor vehicles and other transport equipment, while the manufacture of food, tobacco, paper, chemical, pharmaceutical, other non-metallic mineral products and basic metal in relative terms diverged positively.
Despite the significant weakening in March, due to the robust course in the January-February period, annual growth in national income is expected to realize at a relatively favorable level in the first quarter.
The weakening in economic activity became more pronounced in April and spread across all sectors.
Activity came to a near standstill in tourism and related sectors while retail trade saw a deepening slowdown, except for food and market purchases.
On the manufacturing industry front, new orders and capacity utilization rates fell to record lows across main exporting sectors due to slumping external demand.
High-frequency indicators for the first half of May display signs of bottoming-out following the steps taken towards partial normalization.
In this context, there have been slight increases in exports, imports and capacity utilization rates.
Export and tourism revenues declined due to the deterioration in the global growth outlook and travel restrictions.
Export opportunities shrunk significantly in motor vehicles, wearing apparel, textile, leather, machinery-equipment, and electrical equipment sectors for which the European region is the main market.
As a result, despite the fall in exports and tourism revenues due to the pandemic, current account balance is expected to follow a moderate course throughout the year due to the restraining effects of commodity prices and imports.
Accordingly, in order to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial markets, the credit channel and firms’ cash flows.
In this respect, recent monetary and fiscal measures will contribute to financial stability and post- pandemic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy.
Unemployment remained flat in February, while non-farm employment decreased across all sectors.
Job losses were mostly accounted for by unregistered workers, while the falling labor force participation rate prevented the unemployment rate from rising.
Leading 2 indicators suggest that the spillover from the economic slowdown into the labor market was more pronounced in April.
Developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weaken global growth outlook.
Measures to contain the pandemic not only have affected supply chains and production on the supply side, but also have weakened demand significantly amid heightened uncertainty, tight financial conditions, reduced household income and worsening cash flows of businesses.
Growth data available for the first quarter of 2020 confirm a sharp contraction for most economies while April’s PMI data and electricity consumption point to an even deeper contraction for the second quarter.
As of March, the pandemic has a more limited impact on employment across advanced economies, except for the US, but dismal job prospects suggest that economic slowdown may amplify unemployment in those economies over the upcoming period.
Accordingly, global growth forecasts were revised further down and the outlook for external demand, particularly from European economies, deteriorated from the previous month.
The effects of these developments on domestic growth, particularly on exports, tourism and related sectors, are being closely monitored.
Central banks in advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary measures.
There have been further rate cuts, albeit more moderate ones, and balance sheet sizes of major central banks remain on the rise.
Emerging economies have also taken expansionary monetary policy measures such as bond purchases.
The effectiveness of these policies for financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic in each country and how much policy room each country has.
While uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high, normalization steps taken by several countries are being watched.
While the impact of normalization steps on economic activity is monitored in those countries, where the outbreak is starting to be brought relatively under control, uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects of the outbreak and health measures on consumption habits and general spending behavior.
Crude oil demand has decreased significantly with economic activity ground to a halt across many industries around the globe.
Global crude oil inventories are at record-high levels.
Although oil prices were slightly up after the steps taken by major oil producing countries to sustain output cuts, there remain downside risks to oil prices, particularly due to the uncertainty about the global economic activity.
The weakening global risk appetite caused a significant rise in financial market volatility.
Global risk appetite and financial market volatility have recently shown signs of improvement.
However, stock and bond markets in advanced and emerging economies continue to fluctuate.
Emerging markets continue to see massive capital outflows.
With somewhat reduced pandemic uncertainty and partially loosened restrictions, and thanks to recent monetary and financial measures, adverse effects of global developments on Turkey’s risk premium and exchange rate volatility partially eased.
As uncertainty still reigns, the 3 pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures introduced to address the pandemic, as well as the expansion of loan supply, mostly by state-owned banks, have mitigated downside risks to loan growth and contributed to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector.
After having lost momentum due to macroprudential measures in the first months of 2020, consumer loan growth continues, albeit at a slower pace since mid-March when the first coronavirus case was reported.
On the other hand, strong momentum in commercial loans continues.
Guaranteed-loans, led by state-owned banks in particular, propped up commercial and personal loan supply and helped bring interest rates further down, thus alleviating the negative effects of the pandemic on income and cash flows of economic units.
Developments in inflation expectations and domestic demand conditions have contributed to a mild trend in core inflation indicators.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affect inflation outlook favorably.
Although consumer inflation might follow a slightly higher course in the short term due to seasonal and pandemic-related effects on food prices, demand-driven disinflationary effects will be more prevalent in the second half of the year.
Under the current monetary policy stance, inflation outlook is considered to be in line with the year-end inflation projection.
Therefore, it is considered to be of critical importance that macro-scale monetary and fiscal policies be complemented with policy measures that target the most- affected economic units and consider sectoral interactions.
In May, consumer prices increased by 1.36% and annual inflation rose by 0.45 points to 11.39%.
In this period, as underlined in the May MPC meeting summary, food inflation increased due to unprocessed food prices.
Although energy inflation increased on the back of international oil prices, it continued to restrain consumer inflation.
While the depreciation in the Turkish lira had reflections on the core goods, primarily the durable goods inflation, the slowdown in services inflation continued, led by items that experienced a disruption in activity due to the pandemic.
Consequently, the trends of core indicators posted a slight uptick.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.59% to 12.87% in May.
This rise was mainly driven by the unprocessed food group with an annual inflation that increased by 4.91 points.
The fall in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables that remained relatively limited compared to previous years due to period-specific developments and the price hikes in eggs and pulses that are highly sensitive to the exchange rate were the main factors that had an adverse impact on the unprocessed food inflation.
While monthly inflation in the processed food group decelerated slightly, annual inflation declined significantly on the back of the base effect.
Meanwhile, leading indicators suggest that annual unprocessed food inflation may also rise in June.
Energy prices increased by 2.13% in May and annual energy inflation rose by 1.93 points to 5.23%.
The recovery in international oil prices along with the depreciation of the Turkish lira determined the rise in energy prices.
Leading indicators suggest that annual energy inflation may rise in June.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.38 points to 9.26% in May.
In this period, both durable consumption goods and clothing and footwear prices posted significant increases.
While in the durable goods group increases in the prices of automobiles and white goods driven by the cumulative depreciation of the Turkish lira were noteworthy, the clothing and footwear group saw a price increase above seasonal averages.
Services prices increased by 0.73% in May, and annual services inflation edged down by 0.48 points to 11.28%.
The limiting effects of the pandemic on services prices started to be felt in this period.
As a matter of fact, while the most noticeable decline in annual inflation was seen in restaurants-hotels, the operations of which were interrupted significantly, annual inflation in other services and rents also posted a decline.
The capacity limitations in transport services applied as part of gradual normalization steps led to an increase in annual transport inflation through the channel of unit costs.
While inflation expectations for the year-end increased slightly, those for the next 12 months declined in June.
Factors Afecting Inflation 7.
The weakening in economic activity became more pronounced in April and spread across sectors.
The industrial production, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, contracted by 30.4% month-on-month in April.
The decline in the production of the main exporting sectors, primarily motor vehicles, wearing apparel and textiles, became more discernible.
In the same period, while tourism revenues almost came to a halt due to travel restrictions, services sectors, in particular trade, accommodation-food and transport-storage services, experienced a drastic deceleration due to the measures taken against the pandemic.
Economic recovery has started as of May following gradual steps towards normalization.
The relief of the restrictions on movement and improving credit conditions support domestic demand.
While expenditures by cards for items with high sensitivity to financing conditions and deferred demand have soared, the consumption of electricity has also been increasing steadily.
In the meantime, exports show an improvement across foreign trade partners, while the demand for imports has been increasing in line with the domestic demand.
Exports and tourism revenues declined on account of the deterioration in the global growth outlook and travel restrictions due to the pandemic.
However, the recovery in exports of goods with the ongoing normalization and low levels of commodity prices will support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.
The Committee underscored the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and in terms of macrofinancial stability.
In order to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy, it is of crucial importance to ensure the healthy functioning of financial markets, the credit channel and firms’ cash flows.
In this respect, the recent monetary and fiscal measures contribute to financial stability and economic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy.
The pace of the recovery in economic activity will depend on the course of the normalization process in Turkey as well as in the global economy.
The slowdown in economic activity also had implications on the labor market data.
The non- farm employment in March period decreased by 4.3% compared to February period, more apparently in the construction and services sectors.
However, the increase in the unemployment rate remained relatively limited on the back of the decline in the labor force participation rate.
Leading indicators reveal that new job posts increased and employment opportunities improved partially thanks to the improvement in economic activity.
As developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weakened global growth in the second quarter, normalization steps taken by several countries have contributed to a partial recovery.
Nevertheless, due to the continued spread of the pandemic primarily in the southern hemisphere and the likelihood of a second wave, uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high.
Uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects of the outbreak and health measures on consumption habits and general 2 spending behavior.
In the period following the MPC meeting, oil prices posted a recovery over the agreement of OPEC+ countries on supply cut and the expectations that the worst is over on the demand side.
However, there remain downside risks to commodity prices, particularly due to the uncertainty about the global economic activity, and global inflation rates are expected to be moderate throughout 2020.
Long-term interest rates fell to historic lows across advanced economies, and both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low-rate environment is likely to continue for a long period.
Accommodative policy measures and steps towards normalization have driven the risk appetite slightly higher, slowing down portfolio outflows from emerging markets.
Following the normalization steps, and also thanks to recent monetary and financial measures, the adverse effects of global developments on Turkey’s risk premium and exchange rate volatility somewhat eased.
However, the ongoing uncertainties over the global economic outlook and effectiveness of policy measures might lead to fluctuations in the global risk appetite and portfolio flows to emerging economies.
The momentum of loan growth remains robust thanks to guaranteed loans facility, as well as supporting packages for construction, tourism and domestic manufacturing sectors.
Guaranteed loans, led by state-owned banks in particular, propped up commercial and personal loan supply and helped bring interest rates further down, thus alleviating the negative effects of the pandemic on income and cash flows of economic units.
Recently announced personal loan packages also helped boost the demand for housing loans.
Despite the restraining effects of aggregate demand conditions, the pandemic-related rise in unit costs have led to some increase in the trends of core inflation indicators.
International commodity prices have continued to restrain consumer inflation, while food inflation has risen due to seasonal and pandemic-related effects.
As the normalization process continues, supply-side factors, which have prevailed recently due to pandemic-related restrictions, will phase out and demand-driven disinflationary effects will become more prevalent in the second half of the year.
Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.
In this respect, the monetary stance will be determined by considering the indicators of the underlying inflation trend to ensure the 3 continuation of the disinflation process.
In June, consumer prices increased by 1.13% and annual inflation rose by 1.23 points to 12.62%.
In this period, annual inflation was down in processed food, but edged further up in unprocessed food, keeping food inflation flat.
Despite rising on the back of international crude oil prices, energy inflation continued to restrain consumer inflation.
Cumulative exchange rate effects, the pandemic-driven increase in unit costs, and the rising demand for certain sectors amid stronger credit supply drove core goods inflation higher.
Meanwhile, services inflation went up due to items affected by normalization process.
Consequently, the annual inflation rates and trends of core indicators increased.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.06 points to 12.93%.
The soaring annual inflation in vegetables pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by 2.15 points to 12.29%.
On the other unprocessed food front, prices of pulses, dried fruits and nuts and rice continued to climb in June, whereas prices of red meat saw a downtick after having soared in recent months.
Processed food prices posted a modest monthly increase and annual processed food inflation fell by 2.09 points to 13.41% amid base effects.
Energy prices increased by 2.62% in June and annual energy inflation rose by 3.89 points to 9.12%.
The ongoing recovery in international oil prices was the main driver of the rise in energy prices.
There was also a notable increase in municipal water rates.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 2.14 points to 11.39% in June.
In this period, annual inflation was up across all subcategories.
Prices were driven higher by cumulative exchange rate effects, pandemic-driven unit cost increases and the growing demand for certain subcategories due to favorable credit conditions.
Therefore, price hikes were more significant in automobiles, white goods and other electrical and non-electrical appliances.
Meanwhile, price increases in clothing and footwear exceeded seasonal averages in June.
Prices of services increased by 2.09% in June, and annual services inflation rose by 0.48 points to 11.76%, largely due to sectors facing capacity constraints amid gradual normalization, with transport and restaurants-hotels in the lead.
In fact, the largest increase in annual inflation was recorded for transport.
Other subcategories with higher annual inflation included catering services, accommodation, and items of other services such as package tours and personal grooming services.
In this period, inflation remained low in communication, while annual rent inflation continued to decline.
Year-end and 12-month-ahead inflation expectations were up in July while 24-month-ahead expectations remained flat.
Recent data releases confirmed that economic activity started to bottom out in May.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial production index was up 17.6% month-on-month.
Likewise, turnover indices showed that the decline in non-industrial sectors halted.
However, as the March-April contraction was only partially compensated, economic activity seems to have been weak in May.
Economic recovery, which started in May following gradual steps towards normalization, is gaining pace.
Improving credit conditions support domestic demand.
While expenditures by cards for items with high sensitivity to financing conditions and deferred demand have increased briskly, the consumption of electricity has also been increasing steadily.
On the other hand, the weak course continues in services groups hardest hit by the pandemic, such as transportation, accommodation, and catering services.
High-frequency data indicate that the recovery in the foreign trade volume continues, most visibly in exports.
The improvement in exports spreads across all regions and sectors.
Although tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic, easing travel restrictions are expected to contribute to a partial improvement.
Indeed, credit card spending by foreigners and other high-frequency data carry signals, albeit still weak, for a recovery from trough in tourism activity.
The recovery in exports of goods and low levels of commodity prices will support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.
In light of currently available data, economic activity is expected to post a significant improvement in the third quarter.
Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy contribute to financial stability and economic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy.
In the April period, employment losses continued to be registered across all sectors, the services sector in particular, and unemployment rates rose.
The decline in the labor force participation rate continued to limit the rise in unemployment rates.
Developments regarding the spread of the coronavirus substantially weakened global growth in the second quarter.
While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high due to the continued spread of the pandemic and the likelihood of a second wave.
Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects of the outbreak and health measures on consumption habits and general spending behavior.
If the normalization takes longer or a second wave of the pandemic strikes in the period ahead, the nascent recovery in global economy may be interrupted and there may be fluctuations in the global risk appetite.
In the period following the June MPC meeting, crude oil prices mildly increased due to the recovering global activity as well as OPEC+ countries’ tapering of supply cuts as part of the 2 second phase of the agreement they reached in April.
Still, the current level of oil prices is below the levels in the pre-pandemic period.
On the other hand, there remain downside risks to commodity prices, particularly due to the uncertainty about the global economic activity, and global inflation rates are expected to be moderate throughout 2020.
Advanced and emerging economies continue to take expansionary monetary and fiscal measures.
While long-term interest rates remain at historic lows across advanced economies, both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low-rate environment is likely to continue for a long period.
Although accommodative policy measures and steps towards normalization have driven the risk appetite slightly higher recently, portfolio flows to emerging markets remain weak.
The ongoing uncertainties over the global economic outlook might lead to fluctuations in the global risk appetite and portfolio flows to emerging economies.
The negative effects of global developments have somewhat eased in the recent period but global uncertainties remain high.
In this respect, the pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices.
The CBRT will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures as well as the credit expansion, driven mostly by state-owned banks, make a significant contribution to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector and the economic recovery process.
Loan growth, which gained momentum thanks to the guaranteed loans facility and predominantly in line with firms’ demand, remains robust due to personal loan packages offered by state-owned banks following the saturation of firms’ loan demand as well as due to the realization of consumers’ deferred demand.
Loan growth and loan composition are closely monitored for their impact on domestic and external balance.
Despite the restraining effects of aggregate demand conditions, pandemic-related rise in unit costs have led to an increase in the trends of core inflation indicators.
As the normalization process continues, supply-side factors, which have prevailed recently due to pandemic-related restrictions, will phase out.
Indeed, leading indicators show that monthly price increases have started to slow down in services groups that have been subject to capacity constraints during the normalization process.
The Committee maintains the view that demand-driven disinflationary effects will become more prevalent in the second half of the year, but risks to the end-year projection are considered to be on the upside due to recent realizations in inflation.
Accordingly, 3 accommodative liquidity measures implemented since March may be revised in a gradual manner, depending on how the normalization evolves.
Fiscal policy actions, along with other monetary and financial measures taken during the pandemic, have supported the potential output of the economy by limiting the pandemic- related economic risks and significantly contributed to the start of a recovery in economic activity.
Sustaining the coordination between monetary and fiscal policies during the recovery process, and determining the macro policy mix in a way that will ensure the continuation of the disinflation process while supporting the current account balance are crucial for maintaining healthy and stable growth.
In the upcoming period, temporary and targeted fiscal and quasi-fiscal policy actions will be critical to support the sectors in which the recovery may take longer due to pandemic-related effects.
In July, consumer prices edged up by 0.58% and annual inflation dropped by 0.86 points to 11.76%.
The decline in annual inflation stemmed from base effects led by tax adjustments made in the same month of the previous year, while the underlying trend of inflation remained on an upward track due to cost factors such as exchange rates and import prices as well as the strong credit impulse.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages fell by 0.20 points to 12.73%.
The fruit group pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by 1.56 points to 13.85%.
While unprocessed food prices remained flat, the rise in egg prices stood out, and pulse prices, which displayed a significant increase in the first half of the year, declined.
In July, processed food prices posted a mild outlook and annual processed food inflation fell by 1.77 points to 11.64% with the support of base effects.
Energy prices rose by 2.50% in July and annual energy inflation fell by 0.55 points to 8.57%.
The recovery in international oil prices was the main driver of the rise in energy prices, which was accompanied by an increase in municipal water rates.
Despite the monthly price increase, group’s annual inflation declined owing to the base effect led by the adjustment in electricity prices last year, which is among administered prices.
Annual core goods inflation decreased by 2.81 points to 8.58% in July due to the durable goods group.
Despite the price hikes in furniture, automobiles and other electrical and non- electrical appliances, annual inflation was down by 5.65 points to 9.98% due to the base effects led by tax adjustments in the previous year.
Meanwhile, there were price cuts close to seasonal averages in clothing and footwear group, whereas the other core goods prices registered mild increases.
Prices of services increased by 1.06% in July and annual services inflation rose by 0.04 points to 11.80%.
Annual inflation decreased in rent, restaurants-hotels and transport, but increased in communication and other services.
Pandemic-driven unit cost increases continued, albeit with a diminishing pace.
Accordingly, prices in the restaurants-hotels group decelerated month-on-month, yet recorded a high increase.
Transport services prices declined on a monthly basis.
In August, short and medium-term inflation expectations remained on an upward track.
According to the CBRT Survey of Expectations, the year-end and 12-month-ahead inflation 1 expectations were revised upwards from 10.22% to 10.82% and from 9.33% to 9.70%, respectively.
In addition to survey-based indicators of inflation expectations, inflation compensation obtained from bond yields also picked up.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial production index was up 17.6% in June month-on-month.
Turnover indices showed that sectoral diffusion of recovery has started to pick up.
Moreover, positive signals for recovery in the services sector have increased, which are observed with a lag compared to those in the industrial sector.
Survey indicators as well as high-frequency data for the third quarter suggest a notable recovery in the economy after a sizeable contraction in the second quarter.
Recent monetary and fiscal measures that aim to contain negative effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy contributed to financial stability and economic recovery by supporting the potential output of the economy.
While commercial loans have recently started to normalize, consumer loans have remained strong and supported domestic demand.
Deferred expenditures for items with high sensitivity to financing conditions have remained robust, while electricity consumption has also recorded a steady rise.
Meanwhile, services groups hardest hit by the pandemic such as transport, accommodation and food and beverages are picking up but continue to remain relatively weak.
High-frequency data indicate a sustained recovery in exports and a significant acceleration in imports.
The recent upturn in imports, which has resulted from deferred demand as well as pandemic-related liquidity and credit policies, is expected to moderate with the gradual phasing down of these policy measures.
Although tourism revenues declined due to the pandemic, easing of travel restrictions has started to contribute to a partial improvement.
The recovery in exports of goods, relatively low levels of commodity prices and the level of the real exchange rate will support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.
The Committee underscored the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and macrofinancial stability.
Accordingly, effects of the recent measures on credit growth and composition and external balance are monitored closely.
While there are signs of partial improvement in the labor market due to economic recovery as well as the measures taken, unemployment rates continued to rise in the May period.
In this period, non-farm employment receded further due to the services sector, while construction employment increased.
After a downtrend for a while, the labor force participation rate remained flat.
Leading indicators reveal that new job posts increased and employment opportunities continued to improve.
While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on recovery remain high due to the continued spread of the pandemic and the possibility of a second wave.
In case 2 normalization takes a long time or a second wave in the pandemic is seen in the upcoming period, the nascent recovery in global economy may be interrupted and fluctuations in the global risk appetite may be observed.
In the period following the July MPC meeting, crude oil prices continued to increase modestly on the back of recovering global activity.
Advanced and emerging economies continue to maintain expansionary monetary and fiscal stances.
Portfolio flows to emerging economies proved more favorable than the previous month.
In August, inflows to bond markets were moderate, while outflows from stock markets declined month-on-month.
However, ongoing uncertainties over the global economic outlook might lead to fluctuations in the global risk appetite and portfolio flows to emerging economies.
In fact, Turkey’s risk premium is fluctuating due to pandemic-driven global uncertainties and country-specific factors.
During this period marked with high uncertainties, the pandemic disease is closely monitored for its evolving global impact on capital flows, financial conditions, international trade and commodity prices.
Against this background, the CBRT will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures as well as the credit expansion, driven mostly by state-owned banks, made a significant contribution to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector and the economic recovery process.
Thus, the economy’s production potential was supported and economic activity has started to recover significantly since May.
The Committee, considering the rebound in the economy and its reflections into macro balances, assessed that conditions have evolved to allow for gradual withdrawal of the pandemic- specific supportive macro-policy steps.
Within the scope of liquidity measures taken in this regard, targeted additional liquidity facilities started to be gradually phased down.
In addition, one-week repo auctions were suspended as of August 7; liquidity limits offered to primary dealers were first reduced to half, and then zero; banks’ borrowing limits at the CBRT Interbank Money Market for overnight transactions were reduced to half.
As part of the tightening steps taken under liquidity management, traditional repo auctions started on August 13.
These steps will continue to increase the weighted average funding cost in the upcoming period.
In line with the monetary tightening steps, the Turkish lira and FX reserve requirement ratios are raised for banks fulfilling real credit growth conditions.
In this context, required reserve ratios applied to precious metal deposit accounts were set higher.
Upon these decisions, a significant part of the liquidity provided through the accommodative measures implemented since March will be withdrawn.
Normalization of the measures taken to contain the adverse effects of the pandemic and the tightening steps in liquidity policies have led to an increase in loan and deposit rates, and loan growth has started to decelerate.
Loan growth and loan composition continue to be monitored closely for their impact on domestic and external balance.
Along with the pandemic-related rise in unit costs, exchange rate and credit developments restrain the demand-side disinflationary effects, and the trends of core inflation indicators have increased.
Leading indicators for August suggest a sustained rise in the trend of inflation.
As the normalization process continues, supply-side factors, which have prevailed recently due to pandemic-related restrictions, will phase out, yet the recent developments pose risks to the pricing behavior.
In this respect, the gradual normalization of pandemic- specific financial measures and the recent tightening steps taken in liquidity management are judged to support macrofinancial stability.
However, depending on the course of the pandemic, uncertainties regarding domestic and external demand conditions remain significant.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, while continuing with liquidity measures.
In August, consumer prices rose by 0.86% and annual inflation remained flat at 11.77%.
While annual inflation rose in core goods, energy and food groups, it remained unchanged in the services group.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group declined significantly due to the high base from tobacco products.
In this period, annual inflation rates and trends of core indicators registered a rise.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 0.78 points to 13.51% in August.
The rise in annual unprocessed food inflation by 1.51 points to 15.36% was the main driver of this increase.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that rise in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables were prominent in the unprocessed food group.
Annual inflation in the processed food group increased by 0.22 points to 11.86%.
This uptick was led by the bread and cereals group, while annual inflation in the other processed food group remained flat.
Energy prices rose by 1.29% in August and the group’s annual inflation increased by 1.02 points to 9.59%.
In line with the increases in exchange rates and international oil prices, the rise in fuel prices pushed energy inflation up.
Municipal water tariffs climbed further in August, another factor that negatively affected the group’s inflation.
However, the high base driven by the previous year’s adjustment to administered natural gas prices limited inflation in this group.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 1.44 points to 10.02% in August due to exchange rate developments, as well as stronger demand conditions on the back of the credit impulse.
Annual inflation in durable goods, which is characterized by high exchange rate pass-through, climbed by 3.09 points to 13.07%, and leading indicators showed that high price hikes continued across subcategories in September.
In August, prices of other core goods posted an uptick, while seasonal discounts in the clothing and footwear group were higher compared to the last year.
Services prices rose by 1.14% in August and annual group inflation remained flat at 11.83%.
While annual inflation increased in restaurants-hotels and communication services, it declined in other groups.
The fall in the annual inflation of transport services was mainly driven by intercity passenger transportation.
The restaurants-hotels group posted price hikes both in catering and, more significantly, in accommodation services.
While the increase in the prices of exchange-rate-sensitive items in the other services group was notable, the monthly increase in educational services remained limited.
Meanwhile, the VAT cut on educational services is expected to have a favorable effect on prices in the upcoming period.
Annual inflation in the alcohol-tobacco group dropped by 19.34 points to 2.44% in August.
In this period, alcoholic beverage prices rose by 2.58%, while tobacco prices, despite remaining flat, drove the annual inflation in this group significantly down due to the high base.
Meanwhile, in response to international prices and exchange rate developments, gold prices registered a monthly increase of 13.72%, thereby contributing to annual consumer inflation by 1.01 points.
In September, inflation expectations continued to increase.
The year-end inflation expectation rose by 64 basis points to 11.46%, and the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 45 basis points to 10.15%.
Economic activity is recovering markedly in the third quarter owing to gradual steps towards normalization and the strong credit impulse.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the industrial production index picked up by 8.4% in July month-on-month and converged to the pre-pandemic level.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that economic activity gained strength in August and September.
Turnover indices showed that sectoral diffusion of the recovery continues to widen, while economic activity remains relatively weak in some sectors restrained by tourism and export outlook.
Nevertheless, tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit impulse, on external balance and inflation.
Accordingly, the normalization trend recently observed in commercial loans has started in consumer loans as well.
Exports continue to recover across regions and sectors, and reached pre-pandemic levels in September in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms.
However, imports, which accelerated markedly in August, lost some pace in September and export/import coverage ratio excluding gold remained quite high.
The recent upturn in imports, which has resulted from deferred demand as well as pandemic-related liquidity and credit policies, is expected to moderate with the phasing out of these policy measures.
Adverse conditions in the labor market have started to subside in the June period, and non- farm employment recorded an increase across sectors.
Meanwhile, the labor force participation rate, which has recently displayed a significant downward trend, improved on the back of economic recovery, and unemployment rates increased compared to the previous period.
While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high due to the continued spread of the pandemic and the possibility of a second wave.
In case normalization takes a long time or a second wave in the pandemic breaks out in the upcoming period, the nascent recovery in global economy may be interrupted and fluctuations in the global risk appetite may be observed.
In the period following the August MPC meeting, crude oil prices receded slightly and downside risks on prices increased.
The current level of oil prices is below the levels in the pre-pandemic period.
Portfolio inflows to emerging economies have increased since the previous MPC meeting due to improved risk sentiment.
Inflows to bond markets observed since June increased significantly in September, while flows to equity markets remained relatively weak and volatile.
The Fed’s new policy framework and forward guidance reinforced the perception that the policy rate will remain low, which is considered to improve portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures as well as the credit expansion, led by state-owned banks, made a significant contribution to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector and the economic recovery process.
The Committee, considering the rebound in the economy and its reflections into macro balances, decided to gradually withdraw the pandemic-specific supportive macro-policy measures since August.
Amid the policy normalization, the deceleration which had started in commercial loans, started to be observed in retail loans as well during this month.
The Committee underlined the ongoing high inflation trend and evaluated the factors that interrupted the disinflation process.
Pandemic-related supply-side inflationary factors were expected to gradually phase out during the normalization process and demand-driven disinflationary effects were expected to become more prevalent.
Pandemic-driven supply- side inflationary effects still persist, as normalization progresses gradually.
Aggregate demand conditions continue to curb inflation in certain sectors, while price increases are high for goods that are sensitive to financing conditions.
Thus, as a result of fast economic recovery with strong credit momentum and financial market developments, inflation followed a higher-than-envisaged path.
The ongoing rise in inflation expectations poses a risk to pricing behavior and medium-term inflation outlook.
The Committee assessed that the tightening steps taken since August should be reinforced in order to contain inflation expectations and risks to the inflation outlook.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to increase the policy rate by 200 basis points to restore the disinflation process and support price stability.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation is a key factor for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
In September, consumer prices rose by 0.97% and annual inflation remained flat at 11.75%.
In this period, annual inflation rose in the core goods and food groups, but declined in services and energy.
In the core goods group, durable goods stood out with significant price increases in recent months, while the clothing and footwear group witnessed a weaker course in prices compared to seasonal averages.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a relatively mild increase in services prices.
Against this background, core indicators registered an uptick in annual inflation and maintained their high levels in trends, albeit some weakening.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.44 points to 14.95% in September.
Annual inflation rose both in the unprocessed and processed food groups by 2.11 points and 0.93 points to 17.47% and to 12.79%, respectively.
The pick-up in the unprocessed food inflation was driven by the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
On the processed food group front, price hikes in the bread and cereals group and fats and oils group were prominent.
Energy prices rose by 0.50% in September, but the group’s annual inflation fell by 2.82 points to 6.77%.
The base effect in natural gas prices was the main driver of this decline in annual energy inflation.
International oil prices posted a decline in September, while the depreciation in the exchange rate inhibited a more favorable outlook in group inflation.
Electricity prices used by the households, industry and businesses increased starting from October.
In September, prices of core goods rose by 2.18% and the group’s annual inflation increased by 1.66 points to 11.68%.
This was led by the durable goods group, which saw a price hike of 3.70% and an annual inflation reaching 17.38%.
In durable goods with high exchange rate passthrough, strong demand conditions on the back of the credit impulse also proved notable in price increases.
Other core goods also witnessed a similar course and prices rose by 1.54%.
Meanwhile, prices of clothing and footwear diverged from the group, following a flat course.
In this period, having displayed a weaker trend compared to seasonal averages, the clothing and footwear group saw a decline in annual inflation to 6.79%.
Services prices rose by 0.58% in September and the group’s annual inflation fell by 0.99 points to 10.84%.
Annual inflation declined in transport services, restaurants-hotels and rent, but increased in communication and other services.
Annual inflation in transport services registered a significant decline, which was driven by the base effect as well as the plummeting intercity bus fares.
Meanwhile, the depreciating exchange rate continued to 1 affect the other services group.
The VAT arrangement in educational services had a favorable impact on inflation in this group.
In October, short and medium-term inflation expectations continued to increase.
The year- end inflation expectation rose by 30 basis points to 11.76%, and the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 38 basis points to 10.53%.
The recovery in economic activity continues.
The industrial production index picked up by 3.4% in August month-on-month and exceeded the pre-pandemic level.
High-frequency data point to a sustained recovery in September and October.
While economic activity continues to increase with a wide sectoral diffusion led by sectors sensitive to financing conditions, a relatively weak course persists in tourism and related sectors.
Tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit impulse, on external balance and inflation.
Accordingly, following recent policy steps, the normalization trend observed in commercial and consumer loans has become more pronounced.
Although domestic demand is expected to slow down in the upcoming period with the stabilization of pandemic-specific supportive policies, the growth outlook for the whole year has improved significantly.
Exports continue to recover on the back of the competitiveness gains as well as the rebound in global demand.
Meanwhile, the expected moderation in imports has started with the phasing out of pandemic-related supportive policies.
The export-to-import coverage ratio excluding gold remains high.
The Committee considers that the additional import demand led by the strong credit impulse will lose pace in the period ahead and the balancing effects of the real exchange rate will become more apparent.
Accordingly, the strong recovery in exports of goods, relatively low levels of commodity prices and the level of the real exchange rate will support the current account balance in the upcoming periods.
The recovery in economic activity has a positive effect on the labor market.
In the July period, non-farm employment recorded an increase across sectors.
Meanwhile, only half of the employment loss in the second quarter has been compensated for in seasonally adjusted terms.
In this period, the labor force participation rate posted an increase on the back of economic recovery, and unemployment rates receded.
While global economic activity has shown signs of partial recovery in the third quarter following the normalization steps taken by several countries, uncertainties on global economic recovery persist due to the continued spread of the pandemic.
The recently elevated pandemic-related restrictions in the European countries keep downside risks to external demand and export outlook in place.
Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects of the pandemic and health measures on consumption habits and general spending behavior.
In tandem with the subsided global economic activity, crude oil prices remained flat since the previous MPC meeting.
The current level of oil prices is below the levels of the pre-pandemic period.
On the other hand, there remain downside risks to commodity prices, particularly due to the uncertainty about the global economic activity, and global inflation rates are expected to be moderate in the upcoming period.
Advanced and emerging economies maintain their expansionary monetary and fiscal stances.
However, excluding China, inflows to bond markets continued with a limited pace, while those to equity markets remained relatively weak.
Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and possible incentive packages are considered to improve portfolio flows to emerging economies.
The recovery stimulated by steps for gradual normalization in economic activity, which started in May, gained strength owing to supportive policies.
Rapid credit growth contributed significantly to the economic recovery, and economic activity exceeded the pre- pandemic levels.
The Committee, considering the rebound in the economy and its reflections to macro balances, decided to gradually withdraw the pandemic-specific supportive macro- policy measures since August.
The gradual increase in the weighted average funding cost achieved by the steps for tightening in the monetary policy and the liquidity management and the balancing in the accomodative stance of state banks had fast and strong repercussions in loan rates.
The rise in consumer loan rates proved more noticeable, while the normalization trend in commercial and consumer loans has recently become more pronounced.
Presently, curbing risks to the inflation outlook is critical to the maintenance of a healthy and stable growth.
Accordingly, the CBRT strengthened its tightening efforts as of August gradually with a view to containing inflation expectations, restoring the disinflation process and supporting price stability.
As a result of fast economic recovery with strong credit momentum, and financial market developments, inflation followed a higher-than-envisaged path.
A significant tightening in financial conditions has been achieved, following the monetary policy and liquidity management steps taken to contain inflation expectations and risks to the inflation outlook.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, while enhancing flexibility in liquidity management and continuing with liquidity measures until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
Tightening in financial conditions along with the deceleration in loan growth and the sustained uptrend in the weighted average funding cost in the upcoming period will have a positive effect on the inflation outlook.
Effects of the 3 additional tightening steps on pricing behavior, expectations and the inflation outlook will continue to be closely monitored.
The Committee assesses that restoring the disinflation process is a key factor for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
Fiscal policy actions, along with other monetary and financial measures taken during the pandemic, have supported the potential output of the economy by limiting the pandemic- related economic risks and significantly contributed to the onset of a recovery in economic activity.
During the stabilization of the economy the determination of the macro policy mix in a way that will ensure the continuation of the disinflation process with a strong coordination among monetary, credit and fiscal policies is crucial for maintaining healthy and stable growth by curbing macrofinancial risks.
In October, consumer prices rose by 2.13%, while annual inflation increased by 0.14 points to 11.89%.
Annual inflation increased in food and core goods groups, while it decreased in the energy group and remained flat in the services group.
While the rise in food inflation stemmed from both unprocessed and processed food prices, the rise in core goods inflation was mainly driven by durable goods.
Annual energy inflation decreased owing to the base effect in electricity prices.
Against this background, while annual inflation in B and C indices increased, the trend of the B index remained almost flat and the trend of the C index slightly decreased.
In October, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.56 points to 16.51%.
Due to the rally in international food prices and exchange rate developments, annual inflation in unprocessed food group increased by 1.31 points to 18.78% and that of processed food prices increased by 1.70 points to 14.49%.
Eggs, pulses and rice played a major role in the increase in unprocessed food prices.
In the processed food group, prices of bread and cereals as well as other processed foods posted high monthly increases.
The adverse outlook in the latter was mainly driven by fats and oils.
Energy prices increased by 2.09% in October, yet annual inflation in the energy group decreased by 2.79 points to 3.88%.
In this period, although electricity prices rose by 5.76%, annual inflation in the group decreased owing to the base effect.
In October, international oil prices posted a limited decrease; however, depreciation of the Turkish lira led to a rise in fuel-oil prices and curbed a more favorable outlook in the energy group inflation.
In October, prices of core goods increased by 3.29% and group’s annual inflation rose by 0.41 points to 12.09%.
Owing to exchange rate developments and the lagged effects of the strong credit impulse, the uptrend in the annual inflation in durable goods group continued, led by furniture, automobiles and white goods, and increased by 2.41 points to 19.79%.
Meanwhile, monthly and annual inflation in the clothing and footwear remained weak also due to the sectoral demand conditions.
In other core goods, although annual inflation remained relatively low at 9.40%, the effects of exchange rate developments have been observed in monthly price increases.
Services prices was up 0.71 percent in October and annual inflation in the group rose by 0.08 points to 10.92%.
Annual inflation decreased in communication and transport services, while it increased in restaurants-hotels, rents and other services.
Other services group prices were 1 affected by exchange rate developments, meanwhile, maintenance and repair of personal transport equipment as well as health services continued to be the most prominent items.
While price increases in communication and transport services were moderate, annual inflation in communication decreased on the back of the base effect.
In November, the rise in inflation expectations continued.
The year-end inflation expectation increased by 71 basis points to 12.47%; the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 24 basis points to 10.77%, and the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 15 basis points to 9.20%.
Global economic activity has recovered partially in the third quarter.
However, uncertainties regarding global economic activity heightened due to the recent increases in Covid-19 cases.
In case of prolonged normalization due to delays in widespread vaccination, the recovery in the global activity may be slow and the global risk appetite may fluctuate.
Although crude oil prices are still below the pre-pandemic period levels, they have risen since the previous MPC Meeting.
Besides, the upward trend in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically industrial metals and agricultural commodities, increases the upward cost pressure on consumer inflation.
Developments in international prices as well as the exchange rate have an adverse effect on the trend inflation, particularly in food and core goods groups.
While long-term interest rates remain at historic lows across advanced economies, both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low interest rate environment is likely to continue for a long period.
The effectiveness of these policies on financial markets, growth and employment will depend on the course of the pandemic and the available policy room in each country.
Portfolio inflows to emerging economies have continued at an increasing scale since the previous MPC meeting due to improved risk sentiment.
However, excluding China, inflows to bond markets increased at a limited extent, while those to equity markets remained relatively weak.
Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and possible incentive packages are likely to improve portfolio flows to emerging economies in the upcoming period.
Domestic economic activity posted a marked recovery in the third quarter.
According to September data, industrial production index increased by 1.7% month-on-month and by 30.3% quarter-on-quarter, exceeding its pre-pandemic levels.
Considering together with the developments in turnover indices, economic activity recovered with a wide sectoral diffusion led by sectors sensitive to financing conditions and those producing goods for the domestic market.
Nevertheless, the weak trend continued in goods and services sectors strongly tied to the tourism sector.
However, leading indicators and high-frequency data suggest that economic activity has been decelerating since mid-October.
Recently, exports slowed down due to pandemic-driven limitations in Europe while domestic demand remained relatively strong.
Meanwhile, partial restrictions introduced due to the increasing 2 number of cases heighten uncertainties on the short-run outlook of economic activity, particularly the services sector.
Strengthening domestic demand due to the lagged effects of strong credit impulse during the pandemic, affects the current account balance adversely through the imports channel.
In November, imports excluding gold remains almost flat, while imports of gold has still been strong, despite some slowdown.
On the other hand, the restraining effects of pandemic- related measures introduced in Europe have started to be observed; however, since measures are not as tight as those introduced at the early stages of the pandemic and the activity in manufacturing industry continues, the favorable outlook particularly in exports of intermediary goods is maintained.
The Committee underscored the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and financial stability.
In August, non- farm employment increased across sectors, while so far, employment losses have been partially compensated.
In this period, both the labor force participation rate posted an increase on the back of economic recovery and unemployment rates receded.
The Committee emphasized that, within the inflation targeting framework, it will decisively use all of its policy tools in order to achieve and maintain price stability, by taking into account all factors affecting inflation and the increased risks.
The lagged effects of depreciation in Turkish lira, increasing international commodity prices and deterioration in inflation expectations affect the inflation outlook adversely.
While tracked data for November point to an increase in inflation due to the recent exchange rate volatility, this is assessed to be temporary with the decisive monetary policy stance.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to implement a transparent and strong monetary tightening in order to eliminate risks to the inflation outlook, contain inflation expectations and restore the disinflation process.
In this context, the one-week repo auction interest rate, which is the policy rate, is increased from 10.25 percent to 15 percent.
In the periods ahead, all factors affecting inflation will be taken into account, and tightness of monetary policy will be decisively sustained until a permanent fall in inflation is achieved.
In addition to monetary tightening, the Committee decided to adopt a simple operational framework to enhance transparency and predictability, and decided to provide all funding at the one-week repo auction rate, which is the main policy rate.
In this regard, the funding currently provided by the CBRT via traditional method repo auctions with one-month maturity and late liquidity window facilities will instead be provided via one-week quantity repo auctions, which is the principal monetary policy tool as of 20 November 2020.
In line with the primary objective of price stability, the Committee assessed the need for a revision in the reserve requirement policy in order to enhance the effectiveness of monetary transmission mechanism.
Recently, positive expectations regarding monetary policy have been contributing to the decline in the country risk premium.
The Committee assessed that the permanent establishment of a low inflation environment will affect macroeconomic and financial stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in the dollarization trend, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
In order to achieve price stability, a strong policy coordination and an integrated macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
In November, consumer prices rose by 2.3% and annual inflation increased by 2.14 points to 14.03%.
While the rise in inflation was mainly driven by the core goods and food groups, the services and energy groups displayed limited increases.
The increase in food inflation was mostly led by the unprocessed food group, whereas durable goods pushed up the core goods group.
Against this background, annual inflation rates and trends of B and C indices increased.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 4.57 points to 21.08% in November.
While processed food inflation increased by 1.43 points to 15.92%, unprocessed food inflation rose by 8.24 points to 27.02%.
Fresh fruits and vegetables played an important role in the rise in unprocessed food inflation on the back of cumulative exchange rate effects, in addition to seasonality-driven supply-side factors.
Meanwhile, in response to international agricultural commodity prices and exchange rate developments, the egg and poultry items that have a significant weight in the other unprocessed food group posted noticeable price increases.
These developments also had an adverse effect on the processed food group.
The rise in bread and cereals gained pace in November, whereas fats and oils that are highly sensitive to international prices and exchange rates stood out with marked price increases in the other processed food group.
In November, energy prices increased by 0.84% and annual energy inflation posted a limited rise to 4.28%.
While fuel prices increased by 1.37% on the back of the developments in international oil prices, the 3.44% rise in solid fuel prices was noteworthy in the housing group.
Prices of core goods increased by 3.76% and annual core goods inflation rose by 3.23 points to 15.32% in November.
The rise in durable goods inflation became more pronounced on the back of strong domestic demand conditions, stemming from the rapid credit expansion and cumulative exchange rate effects, and the annual inflation in durable goods increased by 6.71 points to 26.5%.
Automobile prices came to the forefront with a month-on-month increase of 9.7%, while furniture, as well as electric and non-electric appliances continued to post strong price increases.
Price hikes in the other core goods group gained momentum, driving the annual inflation up by 2.06 points to 11.46%.
Meanwhile, annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group decreased further to 0.76% due to the weak demand conditions.
Services prices went up by 0.62% and annual inflation in the group rose by 0.5 points to 11.42% in November.
Annual inflation increased in restaurants-hotels, transport and other services, while it remained flat in rents and declined in communication.
Exchange rate developments continued to affect the other services group, and the repair and maintenance of personal transportation vehicles, basic hospital care services and dental services stood 1 out with high price hikes.
The monthly price increase in the restaurant-hotel group strengthened in line with the developments in food prices.
In December, the rise in inflation expectations continued.
The year-end consumer inflation expectation posted a marked increase of 1.71 points to 14.18%.
The revision to the medium- term expectations remained relatively more limited, with the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increasing by 0.07 points to 10.84%, and the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation increasing by 0.04 points to 9.24%.
Global economic activity data indicate that partial recovery since the third quarter continues.
However, despite the positive developments regarding the vaccine, uncertainties surrounding the global economic activity prevail due to the recent increase in Covid-19 cases.
While the pandemic-related restrictions in European countries create uncertainties over the external demand and export outlook, the upward trend in exports continues.
Although crude oil prices are still below the pre-pandemic period levels, they have risen significantly since the previous MPC meeting.
Besides, the ongoing upward trend in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically industrial metals and agricultural commodities, increases the upward cost pressure on consumer inflation through producer inflation.
Emerging economy portfolio markets continued to attract large volume of inflows since the previous MPC meeting due to improved risk sentiment.
Excluding China, inflows to both bond markets and equity markets increased in December.
Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and stimulus packages are likely to improve the positive outlook in portfolio flows to emerging economies in the upcoming period.
National income data and indicators for the last quarter point to a strong course in economic activity.
In the third quarter of 2020, gross domestic product (GDP) posted a significant recovery with annual and quarterly increases of 6.7% and 15.6%, respectively, exceeding its pre-pandemic level.
Domestic demand became the main driver of growth, while net exports had a considerably high negative contribution to growth.
Private consumption and total investment expenditures soared in this period.
While the rapid rise in the demand for durable goods on the back of a strong credit impulse became the main determinant of the recovery in private consumption, services-related expenditures remained weak due to the pandemic.
Recent indicators and high-frequency data indicate that economic activity has followed a strong course throughout the last quarter, although it started to lose momentum as of mid- October.
October industrial production, turnover and retail sales volume indices increased rapidly compared to the third quarter averages.
High-frequency data for the following months, capacity utilization rates and orders signaled that activity is buoyant in durable 2 consumption goods sensitive to financing conditions, such as automobiles, white goods and furniture, as well as in construction-related intermediate goods sectors.
Field interviews conducted in this period also confirmed the strong course of domestic demand conditions.
On the other hand, restrictions introduced due to the increasing number of cases create uncertainties on the short-run outlook of economic activity, particularly on the services sector.
The Committee assessed that the inflationary effects of the sectoral divergences that emerged due to pandemic dynamics and the macro policy mix, along with the risks they imply for the period ahead should be monitored.
Strengthening domestic demand, due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth during the pandemic, increases the current account deficit.
In December, imports excluding gold remain high despite a partial decline, while gold imports decelerate slightly.
In spite of tighter pandemic measures in European countries, exports to this region continued to increase, thereby offsetting the slowdown due to Middle East countries and driving the increase in total exports.
The Committee underscored once again the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and financial stability.
Positive reflections of the economic recovery on the labor market have continued.
In September, while non-farm employment increased across sectors, unemployment rates declined.
Leading indicators suggest that the improvements in the labor market can be hampered due to the services sector on the back of pandemic-related restrictions.
The Committee re-emphasized that monetary policy decisions will be taken within the framework of inflation targeting regime and with the priority of price stability.
The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down cautiously and achieving price stability target in the medium term.
Breaking the backward-indexation behavior in administered prices and tax adjustments as well as in income policies, maintaining compatibility with inflation targets and enhancing predictability are the key components of the fight against inflation.
Endorsement of inflation targets by all stakeholders and commitment to the price stability efforts with a common understanding and public accord, along with determination of macro policies in a coordinated manner in line with the projected disinflation path will strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy.
In this context, the possible impact of the minimum wage, administered prices and tax adjustments to be determined for 2021 on the inflation outlook through aggregate demand and cost channels were assessed.
Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the exchange rate effects, increasing international food and other commodity prices and deterioration in inflation expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely.
Accordingly, the Committee, taking into account the end-2021 forecast target, has decided to implement a strong monetary tightening, in order to eliminate risks to the inflation outlook, contain inflation expectations and restore the disinflation process as soon as possible.
In this context, the one-week repo auction interest rate, which is the policy rate, is increased from 15% to 17%.
In the forthcoming period, tightness of monetary policy stance will be decisively sustained until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation in line with the targets and to price stability.
The permanent establishment of a low inflation environment will affect macroeconomic and financial stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, the beginning of 3 reverse currency substitution, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong policy coordination and an holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
In its decision-making process, the CBRT adopts a framework with a medium term perspective, based on analyzing all factors affecting inflation and the interaction between these factors.
In December, consumer prices were up by 1.25% and annual inflation rose by 0.57 points, ending the year 2020 at 14.60%.
The rise in inflation was mainly driven by the core goods group.
While energy inflation increased due to international oil prices, the rise in services inflation remained limited.
The strong upward trend in seasonally-adjusted food prices persisted whereas annual food inflation somewhat declined due to the base effect.
Against this background, annual inflation rates and trends of B and C indices increased significantly.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 2.53% in December but annual inflation in this group dropped by 0.47 points to 20.61% due to the base effect.
Annual inflation in processed and unprocessed food stood at 15.52% and 26.34%, respectively.
Seasonally- adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables increased by approximately 10% cumulatively in November and December.
Sharp increases in international prices and cumulative exchange rate effects were determinant in the food group excluding fresh fruits and vegetables.
The strong upward trend continued in prices of eggs, white meat, rice and pulses that are among the main food items.
In the processed food group, prices of bread and cereals remained on the rise while fats and oils also continued to post high increases.
The last four months’ cumulative increase in prices of fats and oils exceeded 20%.
High- frequency data indicate that the rise in the reference price of raw milk is reflected in a wide range of the related food items.
In December, energy prices were up by 1.47% and annual energy inflation rose to 5.64%.
This rise was mainly driven by fuel prices that increased by 3.5% due to the rise in international oil prices.
It is expected that even though there is an appreciation in the Turkish lira, crude oil prices will increase at a higher rate in January and group inflation will continue to climb due to hikes in administered prices.
Prices of core goods went up by 1.42% in December while annual core goods inflation rose by 1.92 points to 17.24%.
Cost pressures arising from the lagged effects of exchange rates, the increasing trend in international metal prices and aggregate demand conditions reinforce the strong upward trend in durable goods prices.
The rapid increases in durable goods prices spread across subcategories while annual inflation in this group reached 30.40%.
The gradual rise continued in other core goods inflation in which the exchange rate pass-through is observed with a lag.
In the clothing and footwear group, prices dropped below its previous year level due to the weak course of demand.
The Committee assessed the inflationary effects of the pandemic-led divergences in sectoral demand conditions and highlighted the tourism-driven upside risks to the clothing group in the upcoming period.
In December, services prices increased by 0.59% and annual services inflation rose by 0.24 points to 11.66%.
While annual inflation remained almost flat in restaurants-hotels and transport services, it increased in other subcategories.
Despite the rise in food inflation, 1 annual inflation in restaurants-hotels remained relatively flat due to pandemic-related restrictions.
On the other hand, the extension of VAT cuts on some items of the services sector affected the inflation outlook favorably.
The Committee assessed that pandemic-led dynamics have contained the services inflation.
The Committee also underlined the normalization-related upside risks during the year due to the relatively low course of inflation in accommodation, education, transport, recreational and cultural services items.
In addition, some Committee members considered that minimum wage increase, which is higher compared to inflation targets, would adversely affect the inflation outlook through the channel of service prices and increasing inflation rigidity.
Inflation expectations remain high.
The Committee agreed that the tight monetary policy stance should be maintained decisively for the year-end inflation expectation of 11.15% in CBRT Survey of Expectations, to converge to the end-2021 forecast target.
The information value of survey-based and market pricing-based expectations in terms of the pricing behavior was also discussed.
Twelve-month-ahead inflation expectations decreased by 0.31 points to 10.53% while 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were down 0.10 points to 9.14%.
Some Committee members associated the improved medium-term expectations with the tight monetary policy stance despite news on minimum wage and administered prices, which are expected to weigh on the inflation outlook, and stated that the commitment to fight inflation would play a critical role in anchoring expectations.
However, despite ongoing vaccination efforts, uncertainties surrounding the global economic activity prevail due to the recent increase in Covid-19 cases.
Pandemic-related restrictions in European countries mostly affect the services sector, while manufacturing industry activities remain buoyant.
Strong exports to the region confirm this outlook.
In January, bond markets saw an increase in inflows across emerging economies, while inflows to equity markets were slightly down.
Crude oil prices soared after the previous MPC meeting.
In addition, the ongoing rise in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically agricultural commodities and industrial metals have an adverse affect on both producer and consumer inflation.
Inflation is quite high in paper products and basic metals sectors, which are main input providers for the manufacturing industry.
Supply constraints have become more pronounced as delivery times lengthened in those and related sectors.
Other items driving producer inflation higher include vegetable oils, animal feed, vehicles and electronic products.
These items affect consumer inflation through food and durable goods.
The Committee noted the important role of commodity prices in continuing inflationary pressures despite the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and drew attention to the upside risks for the coming months.
Economic activity is on a strong course.
In November, industrial production index increased by 1.3% month-on-month and 8.7% year-on-year.
Thus, in the October-November period, 2 production strengthened on the back of a 4.2% increase compared to the third quarter.
While turnover and retail trade volume indices also strengthened compared to the third quarter, economic activity was considerably buoyant in services excluding tourism-related sectors as well as in trade.
Hence, pre-pandemic levels were exceeded widely across sectors excluding industrial and services sector groups that were adversely affected by the pandemic.
Survey indicators for January suggested that the increase in the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate continues with a more pronounced trend in intermediate goods and durable goods sectors.
In particular, the strong course of both domestic and foreign demand in the production of electrical equipment that also includes white goods sector, along with its effects on inflation are noteworthy.
Employment developments also confirm the strong outlook in the industrial sector.
Although the downward effects of the pandemic-related restrictions on the economy are more confined compared to the second quarter of last year, the slowdown in activity in services and related sectors and uncertainties surrounding the short-run outlook of these sectors prevail.
Restrictions imposed since early November due to the increasing number of cases have reduced the country-wide mobility significantly.
Travel, catering and recreation were the sectors hardest hit by the pandemic, as was the case in earlier phases of the pandemic.
Evaluating the output gap indicators related to the cyclical state of the economy, the Committee concluded that despite the constraining effect of unemployment and tourism, aggregate demand conditions remained inflationary in the last quarter due to the cumulative effects of the strong credit impulse and external demand.
It was judged that economic activity reached its cyclical peak in the last quarter and started to converge towards its trend owing to the deceleration in the first quarter.
Some members of the Committee indicated that the deceleration in the first quarter was largely driven by the sectors adversely affected by the pandemic restrictions and that the effects of the monetary policy tightening are yet to be felt.
Accordingly, demand-side inflationary effects continue to exist in the first quarter although they will subside gradually in the upcoming period.
The strengthening domestic demand, due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth during the pandemic, continues to have an adverse effect on the current account balance.
Although economic activity has decelerated in European countries due to the recent increase in cases, the fact that pandemic restrictions do not cover the manufacturing industry activity supports the outlook for exports.
While a partial deceleration is observed in the import demand, gold imports are still above their historical averages.
While evaluating the implications of the residents’ dollarization trend on external balance, the Committee discussed the dynamics of gold trade.
Credit growth has started to slow down amid tighter financial conditions.
Attaching a particular importance to the composition of loans in terms of its effects on external balance and inflation, the Committee, in view of the four-week trends, evaluated the slowdown in personal loans positively.
The limiting effect of the slowdown in loans on domestic demand and imports is expected to be more pronounced in the upcoming period.
Pandemic-related restrictions affect the labor market.
In the October period, total and non- farm unemployment rates in seasonally-adjusted terms rose by 0.1 points each and realized as 12.9% and 14.9%, respectively.
Non-farm employment remained flat, while the effects of the pandemic differ across sectors.
Employment in services sectors that are affected more 3 adversely by the restrictions such as accommodation and food services decreased, whereas sectors with continuing activity such as information-communication and transport-storage registered higher employment figures.
Backed by the uptrend in exports, employment in the industrial sector also diverges positively in this period.
The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and achieving price stability target.
Domestic demand conditions, cumulative cost effects, in particular the exchange rate effects, increasing international food and other commodity prices and high levels of inflation expectations continue to affect the pricing behavior and inflation outlook adversely.
The decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening implemented in November and December MPC meetings on credit and domestic demand is expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on inflation are envisaged to wane gradually.
On the other hand, the developments in international commodity prices, supply constraints intensifying in some sectors, and the adjustments in wage and administered prices remain important to the medium-term inflation outlook.
As the lagged effects of the credit slowdown are expected to become apparent in the upcoming period, inflation may increase further in the coming few months due to supply-side inflationary factors that are significant in the short run.
The additional inflation rigidity to be driven by the minimum wage through the services prices channel in particular, necessitates an extended period of a tight monetary policy stance compared to past projections.
The tight monetary stance will serve as a significant buffer against external and temporary volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, pricing behavior and financial market developments.
Accordingly, the MPC, taking into account the end-2021 forecast target, has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance decisively for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability.
As regards to the indicators pointing to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflation and pricing behavior, diffusion indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations will be monitored closely for their compatibility with the targets in the forecast horizon.
Additional monetary tightening will be delivered if needed.
Besides the current information set, if any new information arrives pointing at the risk of inflation expectations and pricing behavior diverging from the medium-term target path, additional front-loaded tightening will be implemented.
The tight monetary policy stance, besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster macroeconomic and financial stability positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency substitution, the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
The Committee reiterated its judgement that in order to achieve price stability, a strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
Committee Meeting 25 February 2021, No.
In January, consumer prices were up by 1.68% and annual inflation rose by 0.37 points to 14.97%.
The rise in inflation was mainly driven by core goods and energy groups.
While annual inflation in services slightly decreased, the fall in food annual inflation was led by fresh fruits and vegetables.
Although prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.48% in January, annual inflation in the group decreased by 2.50 points to 18.11%.
While processed food inflation increased by 2.59 points to 18.11%, unprocessed food inflation decreased by 8.26% to 18.08% also due to the base effect.
The significant drop in seasonally adjusted vegetable prices became the key driver of the marked fall in unprocessed food prices.
Unlike the favorable outlook in fresh fruits and vegetables prices, the rapid rise in other unprocessed food prices continued.
Following the adjustment in the reference raw milk price, milk prices significantly increased (14.52%), while the rise in meat prices was another prominent development.
Processed food prices increased by 3.75% in January, led by cheese, other dairy products and fats and oils.
The rise in the reference raw milk price widely affected related food products and leading indicators point that this trend, although slowing down, continues in February.
Despite the appreciation in the Turkish lira, developments in international commodity prices continued to affect processed food prices adversely, particularly those of fats and oils.
As a result, annual food inflation excluding fresh fruits and vegetables rose to 19.89%.
In January, energy prices increased by 3.24% and annual inflation in the energy group reached 7.86%, driven by adjustments in administered prices.
The rise was led by price increases in electricity (6.18%), municipal water (7.15%) and natural gas (1.09%) prices.
Despite the rise in international crude oil prices, the rise in fuel oil prices remained limited (0.65%) thanks to the appreciation in the Turkish lira and the sliding scale system.
The Committee noted that annual inflation in the energy group, which significantly decreased in February-April period last year, would continue to increase in the upcoming months due to the base effect, despite the limiting effect of the sliding scale system.
In January, core goods prices was up 0.47% and annual inflation in the core goods group increased by 2.94 points to 20.18%.
The cumulative exchange rate effects and demand conditions as well as the minimum wage developments, international commodity prices and supply constraints continued to affect durable goods inflation.
In this period, while price increases in automobiles and electrical and non-electrical equipment decelerated, furniture prices posted a high increase of 6.31%.
Other core goods prices, which are affected by the lagged effects of exchange rate developments, increased by 2.03%.
Seasonal sales in clothing and footwear, groups limiting consumer inflation, remained more limited compared 1 to the previous year and annual inflation in the group increased.
Leading indicators suggest that a partial decline has started in cumulative exchange rate effects on the core goods inflation trend.
Yet, the Committee highlighted the upside risks to clothing inflation that was contained by pandemic-led weak demand conditions.
In January, services prices rose by 1.87%, while annual services inflation decreased by 0.14 points to 11.52%.
Annual inflation increased in rents, restaurants-hotels and communication groups, while posting a more significant rise in the transport group, and decreased in other services.
The rise in transport services was mainly driven by the adjustments in intra-city transportation fees.
The rise in annual inflation in restaurants-hotels was mainly driven by catering services, and the increases in food prices and the minimum wage were influential in this development.
Excluding communication, the trend of the services inflation remained high.
The Committee has reiterated that pandemic-led dynamics have contained the services inflation, particularly inflation in accommodation, package tours, education, transport, recreational and cultural services, and underlined the upside risks associated with the normalization process.
Moreover, it was noted that the special communication tax, which was raised from 7.5% to 10%, had an upside effect on services inflation, as confirmed by leading indicators.
Inflation expectations decreased in January and also in February, however remained at elevated levels.
In CBRT Survey of Expectations the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased by 0.17 points to 10.36% and 24 month-ahead inflation expectation decreased by 0.11 points to 9.03%.
The Committee evaluated the impact of the change in the weights in consumer prices index on the forecast path presented in the January Inflation Report.
It was noted that the rise in the weights of groups with high annual inflation would make an upside impact on annual inflation until mid-2021.
The impact of the weight on annual inflation was projected to reach 0.5 points by April, then post a gradual decline in the rest of the year and die out towards the end of the year.
Global economic activity data indicate that the partial recovery since the third quarter continues, albeit with some deceleration.
However, despite ongoing vaccination efforts, risks to the global economic activity prevail due to uncertainties pertaining to the vaccination process and the course of the pandemic.
The effects of pandemic-related restrictions in European countries are more prevalent on the services sector, while manufacturing industry remains strong.
Despite the recent rise, long-term interest rates in advanced economies are still at historically low levels.
Even though central banks announce in their statements that inflation is likely to increase temporarily in the post-pandemic normalization process, the forward guidance delivered and market expectations point that the low interest environment would continue for an extended period in advanced economies.
Similar to the previous MPC meeting period, emerging economy portfolio markets continued to attract large volume of inflows due to improved risk sentiment.
In this period, the trend of inflows to bond markets of emerging economies remained the same as the previous MPC meeting, while inflows to equity markets continued increasingly.
Crude oil prices have been rapidly increasing since the last MPC meeting.
In addition, the ongoing rise in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically agricultural commodities and industrial metals, have an adverse effect on both producer and consumer inflation.
Other items driving producer inflation higher include vegetable oils, animal feed, processed steel products, vehicles and electronic products.
The Committee stated that in the upcoming months, consumer inflation would increase consistent with the past projections due to the base effect of import prices and the rise would be mainly driven by the energy group.
The Committee noted the important role of commodity prices in continuing inflationary pressures despite the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and reiterated the upside risks for the upcoming months.
In December, the industrial production index increased by 1.3% month-on-month and 12.1% year-on-year.
Thus, production gained strength, having grown by 4.8% in the fourth quarter from the third quarter.
The strong course of economic activity is also reflected onto the labor market..
In November period, seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment increased by 0.2% from the previous period, while total and nonfarm unemployment rates were 12.9% and 14.9%, respectively.
During this period, employment was up in the industrial sector amid supported by upward trend in exports, but edged down in construction and services.
The fall in services employment was driven by the sectors that have been hit hardest by the pandemic.
While the downward effects of the pandemic-related restrictions on the economy have been limited, the slowdown in activity in services and related sectors and uncertainties surrounding the short-run outlook of these sectors prevail.
Survey indicators for February indicated that manufacturing industry activity remains strong, particularly in intermediate and durable goods sectors.
While there is no additional slowdown in domestic demand, there is some weakening in external demand mainly due to lockdown restrictions in Europe.
Domestic demand faces upside risks associated with the timing of lifting pandemic-related restrictions.
Evaluating the output gap indicators related to the cyclical state of the economy, the Committee concluded that economic activity started converging to its underlying trend due to some slowdown in the first quarter, but demand-side inflationary effects continue to exist throughout the quarter.
Business and household surveys indicate that the demand for durable goods has been strong.
Some members of the Committee underlined that personal loan demand is still brisk due to high inflation expectations, and reiterated that the effects of the monetary policy tightening are yet to be felt.
To this end, developments in credit growth and its composition will be monitored closely.
In addition, rising international prices for oil and other commodities also affect the external balance.
Gold imports have declined to their historical averages since mid-January.
The 3 Committee assessed that terms of trade-related risks to the current account balance may be limited if that trend in gold imports hints at a permanent improvement.
The decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on inflation are envisaged to wane gradually.
On the other hand, the ongoing upward trend in international commodity prices, supply constraints intensifying in some sectors, and the adjustments in wage and administered prices maintain their importance for the medium-term inflation outlook.
Accordingly, the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively, taking into account the end-2021 forecast target, for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability.
In regard to the indicators pointing to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflation and pricing behavior, diffusion indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations are monitored closely for their compatibility with the targets in the forecast horizon.
The interaction of risks posed by soaring commodity prices to the inflation outlook with the pricing behavior and inflation expectations will be closely monitored.
In addition, there has been recently an acceleration in consumer loans.
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5% target are reached.
Sustaining the tight monetary policy stance in such a manner, besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster macroeconomic and financial stability positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency substitution, the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
The effects of the monetary policy stance on money markets have been examined.
There has been some decline in loan and deposit rates, recently.
The Committee stated that Turkish lira reserve requirements need to be increased in order to enhance the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism.
For the same purpose, the Committee discussed whether to lower the rates within the Reserve Options Mechanism, which allows a certain ratio of Turkish lira required reserves to be maintained in foreign currency and gold.
The 4 Committee emphasized that the policy rate is the sole instrument to determine the monetary policy stance, while the required reserve ratio is a tool that affects the transmission of the monetary stance determined by the policy rate to deposit, loan and other money markets.
In February, consumer prices increased by 0.91% and annual inflation rose by 0.64 points to 15.61%.
While the increase in annual inflation was spread across all sub-groups, the most significant contribution came from core goods and energy groups.
Under this outlook, while annual inflation rates of B and C indices continued to increase, their trends declined somewhat.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.57% in February, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 0.29 points to 18.40%.
While this rise was mainly driven by the 19.72% increase in processed food prices, unprocessed food inflation decreased by 1.07 points to 17.01%.
In this period, inflation in fresh fruits and vegetables decreased slightly, while in other unprocessed food group, meat prices continued to increase and the lagged impact of the adjustment in the reference raw milk price continued to be observed in milk prices.
When leading indicators for March are taken into account, it is observed that the rise in the reference raw milk price in January had a significant impact on consumer inflation throughout the first quarter.
Processed food prices maintained their rapid uptrend and increased by 2.27% month-on-month.
In tandem with the related items in the unprocessed food group, prices of processed meat products, cheese and other dairy products increased as well.
Meanwhile, with the impact of developments in international markets, the high rate of increases in fats and oils continued.
With these developments, the annual food inflation excluding fresh fruits and vegetables reached 20.75%.
Leading indicators signal that annual food inflation may slow down led by unprocessed food prices.
In February, energy prices increased by 0.25% and annual inflation in the energy group was 8.82%.
During this period, natural gas and municipal water prices increased by 0.80% and 0.59%, respectively.
Despite the rise in international crude oil prices, the rise in fuel oil prices remained limited at 0.16% due to the appreciation in the Turkish lira and the active use of the sliding scale system.
The uptrend in oil prices continued in March, however, the sliding scale system curbed the effects coming through this channel.
As per the EPDK decision of 17 March 2021, a price cap practice was introduced for every province for a period of 2 months and fuel oil prices decreased thereafter.
Despite the curbing effect of the sliding scale system, the Committee has noted that the annual energy group inflation will significantly increase in the next two months due to the low base in the previous year.
In February, core goods prices decreased by 0.12% and the group’s annual inflation in the increased by 1.52 points to 21.70%.
While annual inflation increased in clothing, footwear and durables goods, it remained flat in other core goods.
Annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group rose significantly as seasonal discount rates in the clothing and footwear prices were low this year.
Annual inflation in durable goods had been hovering high due to 1 the rise in the international commodity prices, supply constraints and strong domestic demand; nevertheless, durable goods inflation decelerated on the back of easing cumulative exchange rate effects.
While prices in other core goods decreased by 0.19%, annual inflation remained flat.
Medicine prices, which increased by 6.09% on a monthly basis due to the reference price practice, prevented a more favorable outlook in this group.
It is anticipated that the portion of the increase in medicine prices that were extended to March will be higher and will continue to affect other core goods inflation adversely.
The Committee maintained its emphasis on the upside risks to clothing inflation that was curbed by weak demand conditions due to the pandemic.
Services prices were up 1.04% in February and the group’s annual inflation increased by 0.22 points to 11.74%.
Annual inflation increased in communication services and restaurants- hotels; remained flat in rents and other services, and decreased in transport services.
While the regulation in the special communication tax was the determining factor in the increase in annual inflation in communication services, it is observed that its impact continued in March as well.
While the catering services item stood out in the increase in the annual restaurants- hotels inflation, the rise in food prices and the minimum wage is considered to be effective in this development.
Meanwhile, other services group prices continued to display different trends across its sub-items.
Annual inflation in health and repair-maintenance items remained high, while that in package tours, recreational and cultural services and education activities, adversely affected by the pandemic, maintained its moderate course.
However, the Committee drew attention to the upward impact of the controlled normalization process on some service prices in the light of leading indicators.
The Committee also noted that the accumulated costs during pandemic lockdowns as well as capacity-limiting measures may lead to unit cost-driven inflationary effects in certain sectors, particularly in the restaurants- hotels groups.
Inflation expectations increased in March.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 0.11 points to 10.47% and 24 month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 0.15 points to 9.18%.
In this period, inflation compensations derived from bond yields increased as well.
The Committee underlined that this course of inflation expectations increased the risks to pricing behavior and the medium-term inflation outlook.
Global growth outlook has improved and international commodity prices have risen on the back of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies as well as positive developments in the vaccination process.
In tandem with the recovery in expectations of growth in advanced economies, rising global inflation expectations and long-term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced economy monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets.
Even though central banks announce in their statements that inflation is likely to increase temporarily in the post-pandemic normalization process, the forward guidance delivered points that the low interest environment would continue for an extended period in advanced economies.
Nevertheless, the Committee noted that global inflationary pressures might cause an earlier- than-projected tightening in monetary policies; it is assessed that a period marked by increased data-sensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets is entered.
Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio flows to emerging economies continued, albeit at a slower rate.
In this period, bond markets of emerging economies saw outflows, while inflows 2 to equity markets accelerated.
Portfolio flows to emerging economies may be adversely affected if the uptrend in long-term bond rates in advanced economies continues.
Crude oil and industrial metal prices continue to rise.
The sliding scale system limits the negative effects of crude oil prices.
Although agricultural commodity prices are somewhat more moderate, prices of certain products, oils in particular, remain on the rise.
High producer inflation and ongoing problems in supply chains are additional pressure factors.
Despite the partial appreciation in the Turkish lira in February, producer prices continued to soar in input supplying industries such as petroleum, chemical products, food, wood and cork, non-metallic minerals and paper.
The Committee assessed that upside risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report rose significantly due to an increased credit impulse, especially since the end of January, and rising import costs.
In the last quarter of 2020, GDP grew by 5.9% year- on-year and 1.7% quarter-on-quarter.
While private consumption demand maintained its strong course spreading across all goods and services, public consumption continued to support domestic demand.
Despite the sharp increase in machinery and equipment investments, investment expenditures weighed on growth as construction investments fell markedly.
The Committee noted that, excluding construction, domestic demand exhibited a quite strong momentum, as envisaged, and maintained its assessment that aggregate demand conditions were at inflationary levels in the last quarter of 2020.
Economic activity displays a strong quarterly momentum in the first quarter as well and being higher than projected, remains above its long-term trend.
In January, the industrial production index increased by 1.0% month-on-month and 2.3% quarter-on-quarter.
Intermediate and durable consumer goods continued to be the drivers of the increase in industrial production.
Turnovers increased in trade and construction in January, but remained almost flat in services due to the weak course in sectors that are directly affected by the pandemic.
As the pandemic-related restrictions are being eased, economic activity is expected to pick up in services and related sectors.
In fact, high-frequency data indicate that economic activity has gained strength amid credit developments and controlled normalization.
Nevertheless, risks for economic activity remain significant depending on possible developments regarding the course of the pandemic.
The strong course of economic activity is also reflected onto the labor market.
In January, seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment increased by 2.1% from the previous month, while total and nonfarm unemployment rates were 12.2% and 14.2%, respectively.
During this period, employment increased in the services sector, but remained almost flat in industry and construction sectors.
The data released for the first quarter point to a stronger course compared to the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report regarding economic activity and the cyclical state of the economy.
The Committee assessed that the underlying trend in economic activity is quite strong, considering the limiting effect of the pandemic-related restrictions.
Business and household surveys indicate that the demand for durable goods is still higher than long- term averages.
Some members of the Committee reiterated that personal loan demand is still brisk due to high inflation expectations.
Strong domestic demand due to the cumulative effects of high credit growth during the pandemic and the rise in import prices continue to adversely affect the current account balance.
High-frequency data point to an increase in exports and imports, while the developments in terms of trade have a more pronounced impact on the foreign trade deficit.
Meanwhile, gold imports have declined to their historical averages since mid-January.
Credit growth, which has slowed down amid tighter financial conditions, has recently trended upwards.
Despite this uptick in personal and commercial loans, the limiting effect of the slowdown in loans on domestic demand and imports is expected to be more pronounced in the upcoming period with the additional monetary tightening.
On the other hand, supply constraints intensifying in some sectors and the adjustments in wages and administered prices maintain their importance for the medium-term inflation outlook.
While the expectation that the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand to become more significant is maintained, the projected gradual waning in demand and cost factors is being delayed by the recent upward trend in credit growth and increase in import costs.
As a result of pandemic-driven expansionary policies, inflation expectations have been increasing recently in the United States, causing long-term bond yields to rise, and thus the global risk appetite to follow a volatile course and emerging market currencies to depreciate.
Considering the upside risks to inflation expectations, pricing behavior and the medium- term inflation outlook associated with these developments, the MPC has decided to implement a front-loaded and strong additional monetary tightening.
The tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively, taking into account the end- 2021 forecast target, for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability.
In regard to the indicators pointing to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability, indicators for the underlying trend of inflation and pricing behavior, diffusion indices, demand and cost factors, and inflation expectations will continue to be monitored closely for their compatibility with the targets in the forecast horizon.
The interaction of the risks on the inflation outlook caused by the recent acceleration in loans, the increasing volatility in financial markets due to rising global inflation expectations, and the increase in international commodity prices with the pricing behavior and inflation expectations will be closely monitored.
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5 percent target are reached.
Sustaining the tight monetary policy stance in such a manner, besides attaining permanent price stability, will foster macroeconomic and financial 4 stability positively by facilitating the fall in country risk premium, the reversal in currency substitution, the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
Demand and cost-side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and economic activity indicators, as well as exchange rate volatility and developments in import prices.
The outlook for domestic demand, international prices and global risk appetite heightens the risks arising from external financing needs to the balance of payments.
In formulating the monetary policy towards the target of price stability, the Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses the risks to financial stability.
Consumer prices rose by 1.08% in March, and annual inflation increased by 0.58 points to 16.19%.
Annual inflation increased in energy, services and core goods groups, but declined in the food group.
Against this background, annual inflation rates of B and C indices increased, and their trends remained high despite some decline.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.13% in March, and the group's annual inflation fell by 0.96 points to 17.44%.
While this was largely due to annual unprocessed food inflation declining to 14.98%, annual processed food inflation rose slightly to 19.87%.
The decline in annual unprocessed food inflation was led by the recently mild course of fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that fruit and vegetable prices fell in March, while the increase in other unprocessed food prices slowed.
After upswings in January and February, processed food prices continued to rise in March, albeit at a slower rate.
International oil prices continued to rise, and domestic prices of fats and oils continued to climb, although at a slowing pace.
Prices of international agricultural commodities, which have been on the rise for a long time, have recently displayed a more moderate outlook.
Leading indicators suggest that annual food inflation continued to fall in the first half of April.
Rising by only 0.09%, energy prices remained largely unchanged in March, but the group's annual inflation rose by 3.61 points to 12.43% due to the base effect.
Bottled gas and natural gas prices increased by 2.81% and 0.93%, respectively, in March, while fuel prices fell by 0.69%.
Despite the rise in international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments, their impact on fuel prices was prevented by the sliding scale system and the price cap practice that helps this system to be more effective.
Currently, the sliding scale system eliminates an important inflationary effect given the direct and indirect effects of fuel prices.
The upward trend in annual energy inflation is expected to continue in April due to the base effect.
Core goods prices rose by 1.39% in March, and the group's annual inflation rose by 0.44 points to 22.14%.
Annual inflation increased in clothing and footwear and other core goods, but declined slightly in durable goods.
Across other core goods, prices were notably higher in household repair-maintenance and personal care products with high exchange rate pass- through in addition to the lingering effect of adjustments to prices of medicine.
Durable goods prices had a limited increase in March due to supply constraints and rising international industrial metal prices.
Furniture and automobile prices rose in this period, while prices of electrical and non-electrical appliances decreased, easing the rise in the group’s prices.
Prices of services increased by 1.26% in March, and the group's annual inflation rose by 0.82 points to 12.56%.
Annual inflation increased in restaurants-hotels, communication and other 1 services, but followed a flat course in rents and transport services.
With the easing of pandemic measures, restaurants-hotels prices increased significantly in March.
Cost increases during the period when activities were interrupted passed through to prices, while the increasing demand, triggered by capacity constraints, was another factor that put pressure on prices.
Prices of communication services rose amid the lingering effects of the increases in the special communication tax.
Among items grouped within other services, education and recreation services diverged negatively due to sharp price increases.
The increase in prices of recreation services was driven by the easing of pandemic measures.
On the other hand, prices of education services increased on the back of the backward indexation in private school tuitions as well as the expiration of temporary VAT reductions.
According to the results of the CBRT Survey of Expectations, participants’ inflation expectations have increased in April.
While the current year-end inflation expectation increased by 1.58 points to 13.12% in April, the 12-month ahead and 24-month ahead inflation expectations rose by 0.79 points and 0.37 points to 11.26% and 9.55%, respectively.
The global economy, having contracted sharply in 2020 due to the pandemic, continues to recover on the back of accommodative policies and positive developments in the vaccination process.
This improvement process is determined especially by the acceleration in manufacturing industry activity and global trade.
However, despite ongoing vaccination efforts, risks to the global economic activity prevail due to uncertainties pertaining to the course of the pandemic.
In this period, the upward trend in commodity prices has decelerated.
In tandem with the recovery in expectations of growth in advanced economies, the effects of the rising global inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
Long-term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced economy monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets.
Nevertheless, the Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures might cause an earlier-than-projected tightening in monetary policies, and maintained its assessment that a period marked by increased data- sensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets was entered.
Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio flows to emerging economies have continued at an accelerated rate in bond markets and at a milder pace in equity markets.
The volatility in long-term bond rates in advanced economies keeps the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
Driven also by the exchange rate developments, producer prices posted a strong widespread increase in March.
Commodity prices have registered some deceleration in the recent period.
However, inflationary effects arising from disruptions in supply chains persist.
While commercial loans exhibit a moderate course, an upward trend is observed in consumer loan growth despite tightening financial conditions.
Noting that demand and cost- side inflationary effects persisted, the Committee maintained its assessment that the risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report were on the upside.
Despite the constraining effect of the pandemic, domestic economic activity is strong, led by domestic and external demand.
In January-February period, industrial production rose by 2.3% compared to the previous quarter, and continued to hover above its long-term trend despite the constraining effect of the pandemic in this period.
The strong momentum in manufacturing industry activity has widely spread across sectors, being particularly significant in intermediate and durable consumer goods.
On the other hand, the weak 2 course continues in the services sector, which has been adversely affected by the pandemic restrictions.
In February, nonfarm employment remained flat while total and nonfarm unemployment rates rose by 0.7 points to 13.4% and 15.3%, respectively, due to the increase in the participation rate.
During this period, employment increased in the services and construction sectors, but decreased in the industry sector.
Regarding the cyclical state of the economy, the data released for the first quarter indicate that economic activity remains above the potential and aggregate demand conditions continue to be at inflationary levels.
While high-frequency data indicate that economic activity remains strong amid credit developments and controlled normalization, risks for economic activity exist in either direction depending on the progress of the pandemic and the vaccination process in the period ahead.
Notwithstanding the rise in exports and the fall in gold imports, strong domestic demand and commodity prices continue to adversely affect the current account balance.
Provisional data suggest that imports increased in real terms along with price increases in March.
Gold imports, which started decelerating in the second half of January, have declined even below their historical averages in the recent period.
This trend in gold imports limits the adverse effect of the terms of trade on the current account balance.
Meanwhile, exports to both European and non-European countries are on the rise.
Current trends indicate that the annualized current account balance will start to improve in the second quarter of this year.
The Committee noted that tightened pandemic restrictions in some trading partners and supply problems in certain sectors, the automotive sector in particular, may constitute downside risk factors for the current account balance.
The monetary policy stance will be set taking into account the upside risks to the inflation outlook and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and achieving the price stability target.
Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be determined by taking into account inflation developments and inflation expectations, and at a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and ensure its sustainability until the medium-term targets are achieved.
Demand and cost factors, supply constraints in some sectors, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook.
The decelerating impact of the current monetary stance on credit and domestic demand is envisaged to become more significant in the upcoming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance by keeping the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5% target is reached.
The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, 3 accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs.
This would create a viable foundation for investment, production and employment to continue growing in a healthy and sustainable way.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a transparent, predictable and data- driven framework.
Consumer prices were up by 1.68% in April, and annual inflation increased by 0.95 points to 17.14%.
While annual inflation rose in energy, core goods, and services groups, it declined in the food group.
The uptrend in commodity prices continued in this period, and inflation was affected by the recent exchange rate developments.
Against this background, annual inflation rates of B and C indices increased, and their trends remained high despite some improvement.
In April, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.13% but the group’s annual inflation dropped by 0.46 points to 16.98%.
Annual inflation edged down by 0.31 points to 14.67% in the unprocessed food group, and by 0.51 points to 19.36% in the processed food group.
Seasonally-adjusted data for unprocessed food suggest a rise in prices driven by fresh fruits and vegetables.
This was mainly led by the strong increase in vegetable prices due to season transition.
Although red and white meat items diverged unfavorably, price increases in other unprocessed food were more moderate.
The high base in this group was the main factor bringing annual unprocessed food inflation down.
While processed food prices rose by 0.97% month-on-month, international prices continued to affect the prices of fats and oils.
It is judged that international agricultural commodity prices, which resumed the uptrend in April, will continue to affect food inflation.
While energy prices remained almost flat with only a 0.10% increase in April, annual energy inflation surged by 6.01 points to 18.44%.
In April, prices of bottled gas and natural gas increased by 1.64% and 1.07%, respectively, whereas fuel prices were down by 0.78%.
In this period of relatively flat international crude oil prices, fuel prices dropped on the back of the sliding-scale system and the price cap practice that increased the system’s effectiveness.
However, annual energy inflation increased significantly in April due to the pandemic-led low base from the previous year.
Annual core goods inflation stood at 23.13% in April.
Annual inflation decreased in durable goods but rose in clothing-footwear and other core goods.
Durable goods registered exchange rate-driven price increases, mainly led by automobile prices, while the decline in furniture prices had a curbing effect.
The upward trend in clothing and footwear prices has persisted since the beginning of the year, and annual inflation climbed by 3.63 points to 10.96% in April with the arrival of the new season.
Exchange rate effects were visible in the other core goods group, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 2.01 points to 18.81%.
In April, services prices increased by 0.72%, and annual services inflation rose by 0.56 points to 13.12.
While the rise in annual inflation was more pronounced in restaurants-hotels and other services groups, more limited increases were observed in other subgroups.
Annual inflation in restaurants-hotels increased significantly due also to the low base stemming from the lockdown of last year, while monthly price hikes proved notable both in catering 1 and accommodation services.
Price increases in other services were triggered by education services as well as by items such as maintenance-repair of personal transport equipment and dental services that are highly sensitive to exchange rate developments.
The rise in private primary and secondary school tuition was mainly driven by the backward indexation behavior and the expiration of temporary VAT reductions.
The Committee noted that there might be a temporary fluctuation in services inflation due to the lockdown in May and the possible re-opening in the subsequent period.
Inflation expectations continued to increase in May.
While the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.69 points to 13.81%, the 12-month ahead and 24-month ahead inflation expectations increased by 0.55 points and 0.44 points to 11.81% and 9.99%, respectively.
Commodity prices have increased again in the recent period.
Moreover, in tandem with improved growth expectations in advanced economies, the effects of the rising global inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
The normalization process has started in emerging economies, where policy rates remain well below historical averages.
The Committee noted that global inflationary pressures may lead to a tightening in monetary policies earlier than current projections, and maintained its assessment that a period marked by increased data- sensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets was entered.
Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio flows to emerging economies have continued at a mild pace in both bond markets and equity markets.
Driven by commodity prices and exchange rate developments, producer prices recorded a high rate of increase spread across the sectors in April as well.
Moreover, supply constraints arising from disruptions in supply chains continue to have an adverse effect on the producer inflation.
In addition to commercial loans, consumer loans exhibit a milder course.
The Committee assessed that the demand and cost-side inflationary effects persisted while a slight deceleration was observed in aggregate demand.
Despite the constraining effect of the pandemic, domestic economic activity is strong.
Manufacturing industry activity exhibits a strong momentum.
The seasonally-adjusted capacity utilization rate rose by 0.6 points to 76.2%, hovering close to pre-pandemic levels.
While domestic demand has slightly decelerated due to pandemic restrictions, external demand remains strong.
PMI data for April point to a sustained rise in export orders and a partial deceleration in domestic orders.
The weak course continues in the services sector, which has been adversely affected by the pandemic restrictions.
The weekly credit card expenditures data suggest that after posting a recovery in March, the services sector activity weakened in the second half of April due to the re-tightening of pandemic measures.
The Committee assessed that the additional 2 pandemic measures announced for the 29 April-17 May 2021 period would continue to slow down economic activity, however this slowdown would remain more limited compared to the last year’s lockdown period.
Nevertheless, risks for economic activity exist in either direction depending on the progress of the pandemic and the vaccination process.
The high-frequency labor market data suggest that amid tighter restrictions, the improvement trend in the labor market has come to a halt, and job opportunities have remained relatively weak in sectors directly affected by the restrictions and with more limited opportunity for remote work.
In the manufacturing sector, the trend of employment remains strong.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in exports, the significant fall in gold imports and the slowdown in credit amid the tightening of financial conditions support the expected improvement in the current account balance.
Preliminary data indicate that in April, exports excluding gold continued to rise on a monthly basis, whereas imports excluding gold declined in spite of the rise in commodity prices.
The fall of gold imports significantly below their historical average in April after a gradual slowdown from the second half of January had a positive effect on the foreign trade balance.
As the slowing effects of the tightening in financial conditions on the domestic demand and imports become more pronounced in the upcoming period, it is expected that the external balance will continue to improve.
The Committee reiterated its assessment that supply problems in certain sectors, the automotive sector in particular, might constitute downside risk factors for the current account balance.
The Committee maintained its emphasis on the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and financial stability.
The decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand has begun to be observed.
Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current monetary policy stance will be maintained until the significant fall in the April Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved.
The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs.
Consumer loans, along with commercial loans, exhibit a milder course, and the durability of this development is monitored for macroeconomic stability.
Consumer prices rose by 0.89% in May, while annual inflation decreased by 0.55 points to 16.59%.
Annual inflation receded in energy and core goods; remained relatively flat in the food group and increased in services.
In this period, lockdown measures led to interruptions in economic activity in certain sectors, which recorded only limited price increases, in turn.
Against this background, annual inflation rates and trends of B and C indices registered some decline, maintaining their high levels.
In May, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 0.29% and the group’s annual inflation crept up by 0.06 points to 17.04%.
Annual inflation edged down by 0.06 points to 14.61% in the unprocessed food group, but rose by 0.13 points to 19.49% in the processed food group.
Annual inflation receded in fresh fruits and vegetables within the unprocessed food group, whereas it increased in the other unprocessed food group due to the hike in red meat prices.
Meanwhile, processed food prices registered a monthly increase of 0.87%.
Prices in the bread and cereals group rose by 1.00%, while non-alcoholic beverages stood out among other processed food.
Moreover, increase in raw milk reference prices became another factor to keep risks to food inflation brisk.
The uptrend in international food and agricultural commodity prices accelerated in May, and price hikes spread across all subcategories, with cereals and fats and oils in the lead.
Energy prices rose by 1.50% in May, while the group’s annual inflation declined by 0.73% to 17.71%.
This is attributed to fuel prices that increased by 3.84% due to the uptick in international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments accompanied by adjustments in the sliding-scale system and termination of the price cap practice.
It is considered that fuel prices will increase also in June amid the carry-over effects of the SCT rise in May, yet the high base effect will cause annual energy inflation to decline further.
It should be emphasized that despite the recent adjustments, the sliding-scale practice continues to limit price increases both directly and indirectly.
Prices of core goods rose by 0.86% in May and annual core goods inflation decreased by 2.29% to 20.84%.
Annual inflation decreased across all subcategories, particularly in clothing and footwear.
The recent trend of upsurge in the clothing and footwear group lost sizeable momentum due to lockdown effects, and annual inflation declined by 5.40 points to 5.56%.
In durable goods, prices increased by 0.91%, while annual inflation decreased by 1.76 points, yet remained high at 30.74%.
In addition to international commodity prices, exchange rate effects were visible in automobile and furniture items, while the mild course in electrical and non-electrical appliances limited the inflation.
In May, services prices increased by 1.18%, and annual services inflation rose by 0.50 points to 13.62%.
Annual inflation surged in transport services; rose by a more limited rate in restaurants-hotels, communication and rent; and declined somewhat in other services.
The 1 surge in annual transport services inflation is attributed also to the increases in intercity bus fares due to capacity constraints led by pandemic measures.
Price increases in the restaurants-hotels group remained quite moderate due to lockdown, while annual inflation maintained its uptrend owing to the low base.
Inflation expectations of market participants increased in June.
While the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.65 points to 14.46%, the 12-month ahead and 24-month ahead inflation expectations increased by 0.31 points and 0.17 points to 12.12% and 10.16%, respectively.
The worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, supports the global economic recovery.
Accelerated activity in the manufacturing industry and global trade as well as improvements in services bolster this recovery process.
Pandemic-led downside risks to the global economic performance are reduced amid ongoing vaccination efforts.
The increasing trend of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
The effects of the rising global inflation and inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
Since the previous MPC Meeting, the expectations of policy rate hike have been brought forward in tandem with the median expectations of the FOMC members, while inflation projections have also increased.
This outlook points to increased uncertainties and a slight tightening in global financial conditions compared to the previous MPC Meeting period.
Uncertainties regarding the course of long-term bond rates lead to volatility in global financial markets.
The Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data-sensitivity in monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.
Since the last MPC meeting, portfolio inflows to emerging economies have been favorable in both bond markets and equity markets.
Nonetheless, the volatility in long-term bond rates in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
Driven by international commodity prices, exchange rate developments and supply constraints, producer prices recorded a high rate of increase also in May, which spread across the sectors.
Although non-energy commodity prices displayed a slightly favorable outlook in June, it is considered that cost pressures on consumer prices have remained strong because of the depreciation in the Turkish lira and cumulative effects.
Loan growth exhibits a mild course owing to the monetary tightening.
However, short-term trends show that retail loan utilization has increased notably owing also to the deferred demand because of pandemic-led restrictions.
The Committee assessed that a milder growth in retail loans is critical to curb risks to the inflation outlook and external balance.
Accordingly, the course and composition of loans are monitored for macroeconomic stability.
Domestic economic activity is strong.
Having increased by 7.0% annually and 1.7% quarterly in the first quarter of 2021, GDP confirmed the past evaluations of economic activity being above its potential despite the restraining effects of the pandemic.
In this period, final domestic demand slowed down due to private consumption, while total investments and net exports made a positive contribution to the quarterly growth.
On the production side, 2 while the industrial and construction value-added were the main determinant of quarterly growth, the services value-added made a limited contribution to growth due to pandemic- led restrictions.
While domestic demand has slightly decelerated in the second quarter due to pandemic restrictions and the tightening in financial conditions, external demand remains strong.
The April readings of industrial production, turnover index and retail sales volume index revealed that the measures taken to prevent the spread of the pandemic as of mid-April restricted the economic activity.
In April, the industrial production index decreased by 0.9% month-on-month and 0.3% quarter-on-quarter.
Industrial turnover indices suggested that the slowdown in this period was driven by domestic demand.
Likewise, while the services turnover index declined due to accommodation and catering services, the retail sales volume also went down amid restrictions.
High-frequency data indicate that the additional pandemic measures announced for the 29 April-17 May 2021 period continued to slow down economic activity, and that, along with the gradual normalization steps, the rapidly increasing mobility exceeding the levels before the measures, point to a significant recovery in economic activity in the subsequent period.
In fact, the weekly credit card expenditures data suggest that services sectors and retail trade items, which were affected more by the restrictions, registered substantial increases starting from the second half of May.
For the period ahead, the acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
The impact of restrictions on economic activity was also reflected in the labor market.
While non-farm employment dropped by 1.1% in April over the previous month, the total unemployment rate rose by 0.9 points to 13.9%.
High-frequency data suggest a rapid recovery in job opportunities and labor force participation rates following the easing of restrictions.
In this respect, it is assessed that there may be employment increases in the services sector in the upcoming period.
However, the rise in the labor force participation rates may limit the impact of employment increases on unemployment rates.
In April, the seasonally-adjusted current account balance started to improve.
According to preliminary foreign trade data for May, seasonally-adjusted exports and imports excluding gold increased on a monthly basis.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in exports, the slowdown in credit growth, the significant fall in gold imports and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities are expected to accelerate the ongoing improvement in the current account balance.
In addition to the recent import-price-based cost factors, demand conditions, supply constraints in some sectors, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook.
On the other hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand has begun to be observed.
Taking 3 into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the April Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
Inflation is expected to follow a volatile course in the short term due to various supply and demand side factors, with commodity prices in the lead.
The stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs.
The ongoing improvement in the current account balance is expected to become more evident in the upcoming months due to the developments in foreign trade and tourism.
On the other hand, the outlook for domestic demand, international prices and global risk appetite heightens the risks arising from external financing needs to the balance of payments.
Consumer prices rose by 1.94% in June, and annual inflation increased by 0.94 points to 17.53%.
Annual inflation rose in food and core goods, but decreased in energy and services.
Amid normalization steps, price increases were recorded in certain sectors that had experienced interruptions in their economic activities.
Against this background, annual inflation rates and trends of the B and C indices registered an uptick.
In June, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 0.88% and the group’s annual inflation rose by 2.95 points to 19.99%.
Annual inflation soared by 4.09 points to 18.70% in the unprocessed food group, and rose by 1.71 points to 21.20% in the processed food group.
Annual inflation remained flat in fresh fruits and vegetables within the unprocessed food group, whereas it increased notably in the other unprocessed food group due to the hikes in red and white meat prices.
Meanwhile, processed food prices were mostly driven by the bread and cereals group, processed meat products, fats and oils and non-alcoholic beverages.
Moreover, spikes in red meat prices and their spillover effects on the prices of meat products were notable in June.
Energy prices rose by 2.24% in June, while the group’s annual inflation declined by 0.43% points to 17.28%.
With an upsurge of 6.33% due to the carry-over effects of the SCT rise in May, fuel prices pulled energy prices up.
Despite the adjustment in May, the sliding-scale system averts possible price increases.
On the other hand, electricity and natural gas tariffs were increased in July, and LPG also recorded an uptick in prices.
Annual core goods inflation climbed by 1.08 points to 21.92% in June.
Annual inflation increased across all subcategories, particularly in other core goods.
In durable goods, prices increased by 2.98%, while annual inflation crept up by 0.12 points to 30.86%.
These figures were led mainly by the white goods and furniture sectors, while other electrical and non- electrical appliances and automobile items also registered increases.
Exchange rate developments, soaring commodity prices and the disruptions in supply chains shaped the prices of durable goods and other core goods.
Meanwhile, the clothing and footwear group, which registers decreasing prices in every June due to the arrival of the sale season, saw monthly price increases in this period amid steps towards normalization.
Annual inflation in clothing and footwear rose by 1.30 points to 6.86%, yet this level remained low and therefore continued to limit core goods inflation.
In June, services prices increased by 1.94%, while annual services inflation edged down by 0.16 points to 13.46%.
The course of the group’s inflation was affected by the normalization steps taken both last year and this year.
Annual inflation rose in restaurants-hotels, other services and rent, but declined in transport and communication services.
In the restaurants- 1 hotels group, prices soared in the eat-out meals and accommodation items, and annual inflation in this group rose by 1.13 points to 18.86%.
In other services, amid reopening, annual inflation increased due to recreational and cultural services as well as maintenance and repair.
In June, transport services registered price increases due to capacity restrictions in intercity passenger transport by road, but annual inflation receded in this group due to the base effect.
Inflation expectations obtained from the Survey of Market Participants are revised upwards in July.
While the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 1.18 points to 15.64%, the 12-month ahead and 24-month ahead inflation expectations increased by 0.50 points and 0.27 points to 12.62% and 10.43%, respectively.
With the normalizations steps, the divergence between services and industrial activities started to narrow down.
Nonetheless, economies advancing in their vaccination programs exhibit a stronger performance in economic activity by easing the restrictions.
On the other hand, some virus variants recently leading to resurgence of cases keep the uncertainties about the course of the pandemic in place.
The strong recovery in the global demand, increasing trend of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Since the previous MPC Meeting, monthly and annual inflation in some developed economies have increased above expectations.
The normalization process has started in emerging economies, where policy rates remain well below historical averages, and some central banks have delivered rate hikes.
The fluctuating course of global risk appetite and uncertainties regarding the course of long- term bond rates lead to volatility in global financial markets.
Portfolio inflows to emerging economies continued in this MPC Meeting period on the back of bonds, albeit at a decelerated pace.
Driven by international commodity prices, disruptions in supply chains, as well as exchange rate developments, producer prices increased also in June.
The rise in producer prices and the pressure it exerts on consumer prices have become more pronounced on a global scale, including advanced economies.
On the other hand, the upward trend in non-energy commodity prices has reversed since June, albeit to a limited extent.
Commercial loan growth exhibits a mild course.
The effects of the implemented macroprudential measures will be monitored on personal loans, which recently displayed a rise due to the reopening and deferred demand.
The Committee maintained its assessment that a milder growth in personal loans is critical to curb risks to the inflation outlook and external balance.
Accordingly, the course and composition of loans are closely monitored for macroeconomic stability.
While domestic demand has slightly decelerated in the second quarter due to pandemic restrictions and the tightening in financial conditions, 2 external demand remains strong.
In April-May period, industrial production increased by 0.4% over the previous quarter.
Industrial turnover indices suggest that this deceleration was driven by domestic demand due also to pandemic restrictions, while external demand was supportive of industrial production.
In this period, the retail sales volume also went down amid restrictions.
High-frequency data indicate that economic activity regained strength with the rapidly increasing mobility exceeding the levels before the measures due to the speeding up of vaccination and easing of pandemic restrictions.
In fact, the weekly credit card expenditures data suggest that services sectors and retail trade items, which were affected more by the restrictions, registered higher rates of increases.
The acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
As of May, total and non-farm unemployment rates increased quarter-on-quarter by 0.5 points and 0.7 points to 13.5% and 15.6%, respectively.
High-frequency data suggest a rapid recovery in job opportunities following the easing of restrictions.
Favorable external demand conditions and the current tight monetary policy impact the current account balance positively.
The current account balance ran a deficit of USD 3.1 billion in May, while the annual deficit decreased by USD 0.9 billion to USD 31.9 billion compared to the previous month.
According to preliminary foreign trade data for June, seasonally-adjusted exports and imports excluding gold increased on a monthly basis.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the current account is expected to post a surplus in the rest of the year due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities.
In addition to the recent increases in import prices and administered prices, demand conditions, supply constraints in some sectors, possible volatility in inflation during the summer due to the reopening, and high levels of inflation expectations continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior and inflation outlook.
On the other hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is being observed.
Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the April Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved.
Accordingly, the MPC has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
Inflation is expected to follow a volatile course in the short term due to various supply and demand side factors, with commodity prices and administered prices in the lead.
The impact 3 of possible short-term volatilities in inflation on the underlying trend will be monitored closely for the monetary policy stance.
While the current tight monetary policy keeps demand-side factors under control by containing loans and domestic demand, it also supports the improvement in the current account balance.
Nevertheless, the outlook for monetary policies in advanced economies and global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portfolio flows towards emerging economies.
Consumer prices rose by 1.80% in July, and annual inflation increased by 1.42 points to 18.95%.
While this development was mainly driven by the rise in food and energy groups, annual inflation increased moderately in services and decreased slightly in core goods.
In July, the Turkish lira followed a mild course while international energy prices rose, and non- energy commodity markets continued to register decreases, albeit to a limited extent.
Nonetheless, producer inflation remained on the rise due to lagged effects and the ongoing disruptions in supply chains.
Against this background, annual inflation increased in the B index but decreased in the C index, while the recent trends of these core indicators remained high.
In July, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.77%, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 4.93 points to 24.92%.
In addition to the high levels of international agricultural commodity and food prices, cumulative exchange rate effects, and weather conditions, supply constraints for certain products affected food producer inflation adversely, and these increases spilled over into consumer prices with the reopening.
Annual inflation rose by 7.03 points to 25.73% in the unprocessed food group, and by 2.93 points to 24.13% in the processed food group.
Seasonally adjusted data in the unprocessed food group pointed to a significant monthly increase in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, with fruits in the lead.
While milk prices rose due to the regulation in raw milk reference prices, there were also increases in prices of some pulses whose domestic production decreased due to weather conditions.
In the processed food group, the subcategories that diverged negatively were bread and cereals, cheese and other dairy products, and processed meat products.
Another significant subcategory in this period was fats and oils due to external price pressures.
Energy prices surged by 6.19% in July while the group’s annual inflation rose by 4.23 points to 21.51%.
Electricity and natural gas prices increased by 15.01% and 9.84%, respectively, becoming the main drivers of the price dynamics in the energy group.
While part of the required price increase in LPG was met through the sliding scale system, part of it was reflected in prices.
Bottled gas prices also rose in parallel to the increase in LPG prices.
Annual core goods inflation fell by 0.70 points to 21.22% in July.
The Turkish lira followed a relatively mild course in this period, which alleviated pressures driven by import prices.
Annual inflation decreased in durable consumption goods, but increased in other subcategories.
In July, prices of durable goods edged down by 0.11%, while annual inflation thereof registered a decline by 3.68 points to 27.18%.
These figures were led mainly by the fall in furniture prices as well as the base effect despite the ongoing monthly increases in electrical and non-electrical appliances, with white goods in the lead.
Meanwhile, the clothing and footwear group, which followed a moderate course amid restrictions, 1 maintained the uptrend stimulated by the reopening, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 1.51 points to 8.37%.
Reacting more sluggishly to developments in the exchange rate and import prices compared to durable goods, other core goods registered a further increase in annual inflation.
In July, services prices increased by 1.32%, while annual group inflation edged up by 0.29 points to 13.75%.
Annual inflation rose in restaurants-hotels and transport services, remained flat in rent, and declined in communication and other services.
Amid normalization steps, prices increased in the eat-out meals and accommodation services in the restaurants-hotels group in July as well.
The negative outlook in catering services is attributable also to the high food inflation.
In this period, prices remained relatively flat in transport services, yet annual inflation in this group increased due to the low base.
Against this background, prices of services excluding restaurants-hotels recorded a relatively mild course in July.
In July, annual inflation in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group decreased slightly as the increase in the PPI of the last six months was not reflected to lump-sum and minimum lump-sum taxes.
The August results of the Survey of Market Participants indicated that the current year-end inflation expectation was revised upwards and the 12-month ahead inflation expectation downwards.
Accordingly, while the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.66 points to 16.30%, the 12-month ahead inflation expectation fell by 0.14 points to 12.48%.
Currently, the 24-month ahead inflation expectation is 10.52%.
Worldwide speeding up of vaccination rollout, especially in developed countries, supports the global economic recovery.
Leading indicators suggest that with the normalization steps taken, the services sector, which was affected more by pandemic restrictions, has been accompanying the ongoing recovery in the manufacturing sector.
On the other hand, some virus variants recently leading to a resurgence of cases keep the downside risks to the global economic activity posed by the uncertainties about the course of the pandemic in place.
Strong recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Unfavorable effects of weather conditions in major agricultural commodity exporting countries are observed on global food prices.
The effects of rising global inflation and inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
Since the previous MPC Meeting, monthly and annual inflation rates in some developed economies have increased further.
The normalization process in emerging economies has continued and some central banks have delivered additional tightening.
This outlook points to increased uncertainties and a slight tightening in global financial conditions.
The fluctuating course of global risk appetite and uncertainties regarding the course of long-term bond rates lead to volatility in global financial markets.
The Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data sensitivity in monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.
In this MPC Meeting period, portfolio outflows from emerging economies have stemmed from equity markets, while bond markets have attracted inflows to a limited extent.
The volatility in long-term bond rates in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
Producer inflation continued to rise in July due to the lagged effects of international commodity prices, the lingering problems in supply chains, and the adjustments made to domestic energy prices.
In this period, producer prices increased in energy, wood and cork products, the base metal sector, which is one of the sectors providing input to the manufacturing industry, and the construction sector-related non-metallic mineral products.
On a global scale, the level hit by producer prices has continued to exert pressure on consumer prices.
The Committee monitors the adequacy of the implemented macroprudential measures to curb personal loan growth, which recently displayed a rise due to the reopening and deferred demand.
The Committee also maintained its assessment that a milder growth in personal loans is critical to curb risks to the inflation outlook and external balance.
Domestic economic activity remained strong in the second quarter.
In June, the industrial production index increased by 2.3% month-on-month and 23.7% year-on-year.
Thus, up 1.6% from the first quarter, production remained strong in the second quarter.
Indices for turnover and retail sales volume also recorded a sharp increase in June due to the reopening.
However, domestic real turnover in manufacturing and retail sales experienced a quarterly decline in the second quarter.
Leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong in the third quarter with the help of robust external demand.
High-frequency data show a rapid recovery in the pandemic-stricken subsectors of services amid increased mobility.
After the reopening, confidence indices registered increases across all sectors in June and July, particularly in services.
The acceleration of the domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
In June, total and non-farm unemployment rates were down 2.5 and 2.7 points from May to 10.6% and 12.3%, respectively, thanks to the overall growth of non-farm employment and reduced labor force participation.
High-frequency data point to a reopening-induced recovery in the labor market.
However, the rise in labor force participation rates may limit the impact of employment increases on unemployment rates.
Favorable external demand conditions and current tight monetary policy impact the current account balance positively.
The current account is expected to post a surplus in the rest of the year due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities.
The improvement in the current account balance is important for the price stability objective.
The Committee once again underlined its emphasis on the importance of the course of the current account balance for the sustainability of recovery in economic activity and financial stability.
Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be determined by taking into account inflation developments and inflation expectations, and at 3 a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and ensure its sustainability until the medium-term targets are achieved.
The increase in inflation in July was driven by the rise in food inflation, due to supply-side effects in some products led by climate conditions, the high levels of international agricultural commodity and food prices, as well as the effects of the reopening.
Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved.
Accordingly, the MPC decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
The impact of possible short-term volatilities in inflation on the underlying trend will be monitored closely for the monetary policy stance.
The tight monetary stance will serve as a significant buffer against external and temporary volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and financial market developments.
The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is reached.
Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in currency substitution, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and perpetual decline in financing costs.
Demand and cost-side effects remain significant for inflation given credit market and economic activity indicators as well as exchange rate volatility and developments in import prices.
Nevertheless, the outlook for monetary policies in advanced economies and the global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portfolio flows towards emerging economies.
The Committee reiterated that in order to achieve price stability, strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
Consumer prices rose by 1.12% in August, and annual inflation increased by 0.30 points to 19.25%.
While the rise in food prices was determinant in this development, annual inflation slowed in core indices.
The Turkish lira followed a relatively stable course in August, and items that are highly sensitive to exchange rates performed better.
In the same period, international oil prices fell whereas prices for agricultural products and industrial metals increased.
Accordingly, annual inflation went down in B and C indices but the recent trends of these core indicators remained high.
In August, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 3.18%, and their annual inflation soared by 4.08 points to 29%.
The upsurge in food prices was mostly driven by prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, while droughts in Turkey and across the world have negative implications for consumer food prices.
Annual inflation surged by 6.72 points to 32.45% in unprocessed food, and by 1.69 points to 25.82% in processed food.
In seasonally adjusted terms, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables continued to rise significantly in August amid weather conditions, driving unprocessed food prices higher.
Among other unprocessed food items, increase in egg prices was notable, and the outlook for prices of pulses remained bleak.
On the processed food front, the subcategories that saw price hikes were bread and cereals as well as cheese and other dairy products, the latter of which reflect the rise in raw milk prices.
In August, energy prices increased by 0.63%, while the group’s annual inflation decreased by 0.79 points to 20.72%.
The sliding scale system continued to curb annual inflation in the energy group, meanwhile, fuel prices slightly increased in August mainly due to the rise in LPG prices for which the SCT was formerly reduced to zero.
Bottled gas prices increased in tandem with the rise in LPG prices.
In addition to the uptrend in electricity market clearing prices due to weather conditions, international natural gas and coal prices are on the rise as well.
In August, annual core goods inflation decreased by 0.94 points to 20.28%.
While annual inflation declined in durable goods and clothing-footwear groups, it increased in other core goods.
Prices of durable goods dropped by 1.02%, while annual inflation of the group decreased by 2.97 points to 24.21%.
While prices of furniture and white goods posted moderate increases, prices of automobiles decreased owing to the SCT tax base adjustment for automobiles.
In clothing and footwear, annual inflation slowed down due to more significant end-of-season sales compared to previous years.
Overall, in August, the relatively stable course of the Turkish lira suppressed pressures led by international commodity developments and annual inflation in core goods decreased underpinned by the SCT tax base adjustment.
In August, services prices increased by 1.25%, while annual group inflation edged up by 0.13 points to 13.88%.
While annual inflation rose in restaurants-hotels, communication services and rent, it remained flat in transport services, and declined in other services.
High increases in the restaurants-hotels group in line with re-opening continued in August albeit with some deceleration.
The monthly increase in rents gained some pace in August.
The decline in annual inflation in other services was led by services items with high sensitivity to the exchange rate following the relatively stable course of the Turkish lira.
The September results of the Survey of Market Participants indicated that inflation expectations were revised upwards.
Accordingly, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.44 points to 16.74%, and the 12-month ahead inflation expectation increased by 0.46 points to 12.94%.
Currently, the 24-month ahead inflation expectation is 10.71%.
Leading indicators suggest that the strong recovery in the global economy continues, albeit at a somewhat decelerated pace.
Economies advancing in their vaccination programs exhibit a stronger performance in economic activity by easing the restrictions.
Nonetheless, despite the increase in the vaccination rate, new variants keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
Strong recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors, and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation will prove to be mostly temporary with the normalization in demand composition, easing of supply constraints, and waning base effects.
Accordingly, central banks in advanced economies continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
In this MPC Meeting period, equity and bond markets of emerging economies have attracted portfolio inflows to a limited extent.
The impact of such risks through portfolio flows channel towards Turkey are judged to prove to be relatively limited, considering the current levels of non- residents’ portfolio positions.
Producer inflation continued to rise in August due to international commodity prices, the lingering problems in supply chains, and energy prices.
According to main industrial groups, the increases in energy and intermediate goods groups stood out in August.
Agricultural drought that has become evident in some regions leads to a change in the composition of electricity production, having an upward effect on industrial electricity costs.
The increase in intermediate goods prices was driven by metals-related products, items such as wood and cork products that provide input to the furniture sector, and the construction sector-related non-metallic mineral products.
Although economic activity lost some momentum in the second quarter due to pandemic restrictions and the tightening in financial conditions, it remained above its long-term trend.
In the second quarter of 2021, GDP increased by 21.7% in annual terms and by 0.9% in quarterly terms.
On the production side, industrial and services sectors were the main drivers of annual and quarterly growth whereas construction and agricultural sectors limited the quarterly growth.
On the expenditures side, private consumption and net exports had 2 the largest contribution to quarterly growth while public expenditures and investments remained mild.
Leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong in the third quarter, with the help of robust external demand.
In July, the industrial production index decreased by 4.2% month-on-month and by 2.3% year-on-year.
The sector-wide decrease of production in this period is attributed to the loss of working days (bridging day effect) driven by the bridging the official holiday of 15 July (Thursday) with the Feast of Sacrifice (Eid al-Adha) holiday (17-25 July), which was extended to 9 days.
Excluding this effect, the underlying trend of industrial production remained strong.
Survey indicators and export data for August hint that the decline in industrial production will be compensated in August.
Meanwhile, the services and construction turnover indices, along with retail sales posted monthly and quarterly increases in July.
High–frequency data indicate a rapid recovery in the services items most affected by the pandemic due to increased mobility in the third quarter.
The acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery in services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
While employment continued to grow in July led by the services sector, the total and non- farm unemployment rates increased by 1.4 points and 1.6 points month-on-month to 12.0% and 13.9%, respectively, due to the rise in the labor force participation rate.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data suggest that the improvement in the employment outlook and the positive course in the labor market continue thanks to the reopening and the course of economic activity.
According to the provisional foreign trade data for August, seasonally adjusted exports and imports excluding gold, have posted high increases over the previous month, most visibly in exports.
The recovery trend in tourism revenues has also become more evident.
The monetary policy stance will be set by taking into account the evaluations on the source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by monetary policy, and with a focus on bringing inflation down permanently in a cautious manner and achieving the price stability target.
Accordingly, the policy stance will continue to be determined by taking into account inflation developments, inflation expectations, as well as the temporary factors projected to bear effect on these in the short term, and at a degree of tightness that will restore the disinflation process as soon as possible and ensure its sustainability until the medium-term targets are achieved.
Recent increase in inflation has been driven by supply side factors such as rise in food and import prices and supply constraints, increase in administered prices and demand developments due to the reopening.
It is assessed that these effects are due to transitory 3 factors.
The tightness in monetary stance has started to have a higher than envisaged contractionary effect on commercial loans.
While the nominal commercial loan growth remains well below previous year averages, the strong course in personal loans has largely remained in place.
In addition, the macroprudential policy framework has been strengthened to curb personal loan growth.
Accordingly, the impact of the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency’s related decisions will be monitored.
The Committee evaluated the analyses to decompose the impact of demand factors that monetary policy can have an effect, core inflation developments and supply shocks.
Accordingly it is judged that a revision in monetary policy stance is needed and the policy rate was decided to be reduced by 100 basis points.
However, sufficiently tight monetary stance to ensure the return of inflation to its downward trend once temporary effects disappear, will serve as a significant buffer against external and temporary volatilities in the context of inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and financial market developments.
The CBRT will continue to use decisively all available instruments until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall in the country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs.
The outlook for monetary policies in advanced economies and the global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portfolio flows towards emerging economies.
Consumer prices rose by 13.58% in December, and annual inflation increased by 14.77 points to 36.08%.
While this development was predominantly driven by the price increases in the core goods and food groups, annual inflation went up across all main groups.
The impact of exchange rate developments was observed in the core goods group, in which the exchange rate pass-through is high, led by durable consumption goods, and prices in the food group excluding fresh fruits and vegetables rose substantially.
The depreciation of the Turkish lira, the elevated course of commodity prices, and the lingering disruptions in supply chains caused the rise in producer prices to continue at an accelerated pace.
Against this background, the annual inflation and the recent underlying trends of the B and C indices increased significantly.
In December, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 15.99%, and the group’s annual inflation surged by 16.69 points to 43.80%.
Annual inflation rose to 39.83% in the unprocessed food group, and to 47.57% in the processed food group.
In the unprocessed food group, seasonally adjusted data revealed a relatively milder monthly increase in prices of fresh fruits and vegetables whereas they pointed to significant price increases in the other unprocessed food group, particularly in items such as milk, white meat, eggs, potatoes, and red meat.
Processed food prices posted a substantial monthly increase of 16.47% in December, with bread and cereals, oils and fats, cheese and other dairy products, and meat products in the lead.
These developments were mostly driven by exchange rates, agricultural commodity price developments, and agricultural drought.
Energy prices increased by 9.75% in December, and annual energy inflation rose by 10.79 points to 42.93%.
Despite a decline in international energy prices in this period, domestic prices rose due to exchange rate developments.
Solid fuels, bottled gas, and fuel stood out with the ongoing large price hikes they registered.
The rise in energy inflation is expected to continue in a pronounced manner in January.
This is due to the rebounding international energy prices as well as the price adjustments made in January in electricity and natural gas used in dwellings.
Annual core goods inflation increased substantially by 22.19 points to 40.55%.
Led by the durable goods group in which the exchange rate pass-through is high, annual inflation rose significantly across all subcategories due to the developments in the Turkish lira.
Durable goods prices surged by 30.33% month-on-month, driven by large price increases in sub-items such as automobiles in particular, white goods, other electric and non-electric appliances, and furniture.
The clothing and footwear group, in which seasonal sales began, posted a monthly price increase in this period contrary to the seasonal trend.
Meanwhile, price hikes showed a generalized pattern across other core goods as well.
Services prices rose by 5.27% in December and annual services inflation increased by 5.45 points to 22.33%.
While annual inflation declined in communication, it increased in other subcategories, most visibly in restaurants-hotels.
Driven by prices of catering services that increased due also to the negative outlook in food prices, and by prices of accommodation services that further increased in this period, annual inflation in the restaurants-hotels group reached 40.85% and continued to push up the services inflation.
The rise in prices of transport services was led by increases in the intercity road transportation and air passenger transportation fares, while insurance charges as well as maintenance and repair prices with high exchange rate sensitivity were the leading drivers of the increase in prices of other services.
According to seasonally adjusted data, the upward trend in rent inflation continued in December.
The strong backward-indexation mechanism in the services sector keeps the risks for the upcoming period alive.
In December, prices of tobacco products posted an increase of approximately TRY 2, driven by producer firms, adding approximately 0.49 points to consumer inflation.
As of January, the last six months’ PPI increase in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group was reflected in specific and minimum specific taxes, and cigarette prices rose on average by TRY 4 per pack in line with the tax increase.
According to the January results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation stood at 29.75%, while the 12-month ahead inflation expectation increased by 3.98 points to 25.37%.
The long-term data reveal that the revision in the five- year ahead inflation expectation remained relatively limited, and the expectation increased by 0.20 points to 8.92%.
Leading indicators show that the robust recovery in the global economy is sustained, albeit with some deceleration.
Despite the recovery in global economic activity and the increase in the vaccination rate, the new variants and increasing geopolitical risks keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive and increase the uncertainty.
Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation on the back of rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand may last longer than previously anticipated.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
Outflows from emerging market debt securities markets stopped, and equity markets witnessed a surge in inflows.
The impact of such risks through portfolio flows channel towards Turkey are judged to prove to be relatively limited, considering the current levels of non-residents’ portfolio positions.
Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by distorted pricing behavior due to unhealthy price formations in the foreign exchange market, supply side factors such as the rise in global food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, and demand developments.
Producer prices continued to rise markedly in December, largely due to energy and intermediate goods.
Although prices were up across all sectors, their tendency was particularly higher for manufacturing industry excluding oil and base metals.
In this period, prices of main inputs such as base metals, energy, textile, paper and chemical products increased significantly.
The depreciation of the Turkish lira, higher commodity prices and ongoing supply chains disruptions were the main factors driving producer prices up.
It is noteworthy that the indicators monitored for global supply chain pressures reached their highest level in history.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of robust external demand.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the Industrial Production Index (IPI) increased by 3.3% month-on-month in November, indicating that production continued to grow at an even stronger pace in the fourth quarter of the year.
While production grew across all main industrial groups, the increases especially in durable and capital goods were stronger than the headline production growth.
Industrial turnover indices suggest that both domestic and external demand are robust.
As of December, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months remain high.
Despite the recent upsurge in new cases, the spread of domestic vaccination throughout the society helps keep services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, strong, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
In fact, according to data on credit card spending, the rate of increase is higher for services sectors that are severely hit by the pandemic.
The retail sales volume and services turnover indices continue to rise at a stronger pace.
The improvement in the labor market continues in line with the economic activity outlook.
In November, employment grew across all sectors, and the labor force participation rate increased.
Thus, in seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 11.2%.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data suggest that the improvement in the employment outlook and the positive course in the labor market continue.
However, the effects of the large minimum wage hike and the likely increase in other wages to the labor market, especially to registered employment, are closely monitored.
Favorable external demand conditions impact the current account balance positively.
Current account balance ran a deficit of USD 2.7 billion in November while the current account deficit decreased by USD 0.9 billion to USD 14.3 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
Provisional foreign trade data suggest that exports remained strong in December, but imports continued to increase due to the large increase in energy imports.
In addition to strong economic activity, the strong course of energy imports driven by high energy prices and the increased need for heating led to a deterioration in the foreign trade balance in the last quarter, whereas the real balancing in foreign trade excluding price effects continues.
Despite this outlook in the foreign trade balance, the favorable course in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, current account balance is expected to post a surplus in 2022.
Strengthening of the improvement trend in current account balance is important for price stability objective, and in that respect, developments in commercial and consumer loans are closely monitored.
The monetary policy stance will be set by taking into account the evaluations on the source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by monetary 3 policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a cautious manner.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged.
The cumulative impacts of the recent policy decisions are closely monitored and to create a foundation for sustainable price stability, a comprehensive policy framework review is being conducted with the aim of prioritizing Turkish lira in all policy tools of the CBRT.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the price stability objective, the Committee will continue to follow an approach that also addresses risks to financial stability.
Accordingly, the effects of Turkish lira liquidity developments on deposits and loan pricing, the lagged effects of exchange rate developments on inflation expectations, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-hedged deposit products on reverse currency substitution, exchange rate stability and price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures are being taken.
Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and durable decline in financing costs.
The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders in order to achieve price stability.
In January, consumer prices increased by 11.10%, and annual inflation increased by 12.61 points to 48.69%.
While exchange rates were more stable in January, international commodity prices significantly increased led by the energy group.
While price increases in the food group spread across the entire group, fresh fruit and vegetable prices, which had been displaying a more moderate course recently, diverged negatively in January.
The high course of international commodity prices and the ongoing supply problems led to a significant rise in producer prices.
Against this background, the rise in annual inflation and in the recent underlying trends of the B and C indices continued in January.
In January, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 10.90%, and the group's annual inflation rose by 11.81 points to 55.61%.
Due to fresh fruits and vegetables, annual inflation in the unprocessed food subgroup increased by 15.15 points to 54.98%, while annual inflation in processed food increased by 8.63 points to 56.20%.
Prices in the fresh fruits and vegetables sub-group, which increased by 20.82% in January, exceeded seasonal averages.
In the other unprocessed food subgroup, prices of milk and pulses items displayed remarkable increases while in the processed food group, cereal products, cheese and other dairy products, and fats and oils were the leading items.
The VAT rate on basic food items was reduced from 8% to 1% in the middle of the month, thus, the effect of the discount will be reflected on the consumer price index in February and March.
While energy prices increased by 27.41% in January, the group's annual inflation increased by 33.45 points to 76.38%.
This rise was driven by developments in international energy commodity prices and administered items.
As a result of the rise in international crude oil prices and the increase in SCT amounts, fuel prices increased by 23.35%.
In January, residential electricity and natural gas tariffs increased by 69.96% and 21.35%, respectively, and municipal water tariffs also increased by 11.87%.
Meanwhile, bottled gas prices increased by 11.28%.
In this period, secondary effects of the rise in energy costs, particularly electricity, were also observed on consumer prices.
While fuel prices continued to increase in February, the change introduced in grading in residential electricity tariffs and reductions in municipal water tariffs will positively affect energy prices in the near future.
In January, annual core goods inflation increased by 7.94 points to 48.49%.
Annual inflation rose in all subgroups.
Prices of durable goods increased by 6.43%, and the group's annual inflation surged by 7.31 points to 56.24%.
While white goods and furniture items stood out with high price increases, automobile prices displayed a more limited rise with the contribution of the tax base adjustment.
A widespread rise was observed in other core goods prices and annual inflation rose to 51.23%.
As seasonal sales in the clothing and footwear subgroups remained quite limited this year, the gradual uptrend in annual inflation continued in this subgroup.
Services prices rose by 7.89% in January, and annual services inflation increased by 7.23 points to 29.56%.
While the uptick in annual inflation spread across the group, rises were more notable in subcategories excluding rent and communication.
Items with administered prices and time-dependent pricing behavior stood out in January.
Prices in the restaurants- hotels subcategory rose by 8.45% and annual inflation hit 50.40%.
Also standing out in this period, prices in transportation services rose by 16.88%, and annual inflation became 39.31%.
Following the recent developments in fuel prices and the high levels of inflation, significant increases were recorded in administered prices of intracity transport and passenger transport by railway as well as in cargo charges and road and air passenger transport fares.
Among other services, health services that have a high backward-looking pricing tendency as well as maintenance-repair, recreation and culture, and insurance services were other items that pushed up prices.
Seasonally-adjusted data suggest that the uptrend in rent inflation accelerated.
Prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 21.90% in January.
While the PPI increase pertaining to the second half of 2021 was reflected in specific taxes, producer prices-driven increases were also seen in alcoholic beverages.
Against this background, annual inflation in this group reached 45.34%, adding 1.21 points to the increase in annual headline inflation in January.
According to the February results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 4.31 points to 34.06%, while the 12-month ahead inflation expectation dropped by 0.54 points to 24.83%.
On the other hand, the upward revisions in the long-term inflation expectations continued in February, and the five-year ahead inflation expectation increased by 0.13 points to 9.05%.
Despite the recovery in global economic activity and the increase in the vaccination rate, the variants and increasing geopolitical risks keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive and increase the uncertainty.
Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors, particularly in energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
The effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they still continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
The recent recovery in portfolio flows to emerging economies continues.
However, the volatility in long-term bond rates in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
The impact of such risks through the portfolio flows channel towards Turkey is judged to prove to be relatively limited, considering the current levels of non-residents’ portfolio positions.
Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, supply-side factors such as the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, and demand developments.
Annual producer inflation maintained its upward trend in January.
While prices were up across all sectors, the underlying trend of the manufacturing industry excluding oil and base metals rose.
Annual inflation increased across all main industrial groups, most notably in energy and intermediate goods.
The most dramatic monthly increase was recorded in durable consumption goods.
The negative outlook for commodity prices, energy in particular, ongoing supply chain disruptions, and high transportation costs were the factors exerting pressure on producer prices.
With especially energy and non-energy commodity (metal and agriculture in particular) prices posting a substantial increase in US dollar terms in January, external price pressures remained strong.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the Industrial Production Index (IPI) increased by 1.6% month-on-month and by 4.3% quarter-on-quarter in December, indicating that production continued to grow at an even stronger pace in the fourth quarter of the year.
Industrial production grew by 16.4% throughout 2021.
Industrial turnover indices suggest that both external and domestic demand were robust in the last quarter.
Despite a month-on-month decline in that period, the retail sales volume index remained strong above its trend throughout the quarter.
High-frequency data indicate that the natural gas and electricity outages in the last ten days of January had a limited impact on production and foreign trade indicators.
Meanwhile, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high in January.
Despite the recent upsurge in new cases, the spread of vaccination throughout domestic population allows the services, tourism and related sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, to maintain their strength and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
As a matter of fact, the credit card spending in services sectors that are severely hit by the pandemic continued to hover above the trend.
In December, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 11.2%.
Employment grew across all sectors, and the labor force participation rate increased.
Survey indicators and high- frequency data suggest that the improvement in the employment outlook and the positive course in the labor market continue.
The strong course of energy imports in the recent period has been limiting the improvement in the current account balance.
The current account balance ran a deficit of USD 3.8 billion in December, and the current account deficit for 2021 stood at USD 14.9 billion.
While exports remained strong thanks to favorable external demand conditions in the last quarter of the year, imports increased due to robust economic activity, the rise in commodity, particularly energy prices and the increase in energy demand.
The real balancing in foreign trade excluding price effects continued.
Provisional foreign trade data suggest that the energy- driven increase in imports will persist in January.
Strengthening of the improving trend in current account balance is important for price stability.
The Committee assesses that extending long-term Turkish lira investment credit will play a significant role in achieving this target.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively pursued for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect.
While cumulative impact of the recent policy decisions is being monitored, to create a foundation for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework is being conducted with the aim of encouraging permanent liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT.
In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, the Committee will continue to follow a liraization oriented approach that also addresses risks to financial stability.
Accordingly, the effects of the liquidity and distribution developments of Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the lagged effects of exchange rate developments on inflation expectations, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market and price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures are being taken.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5% target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
In February, consumer prices increased by 4.81%, and annual inflation rose by 5.75 points to 54.44%.
The exchange rate was more stable in February, while the upward trend in commodity prices became evident following geopolitical developments.
The increase in annual food inflation reflected the developments in international markets.
Domestic fuel prices were adversely affected by the increase in crude oil prices, and this item became the main driver of energy inflation.
In line with the outlook for energy and food, restaurants- hotels and transportation pushed services inflation up.
In core goods, price increases slowed down in February but annual inflation continued to rise.
Both the developments in international commodity markets and ongoing supply problems caused producer prices to soar.
Against this background, annual inflation of indicators B and C increased in February.
Food and nonalcoholic beverage prices increased by 8.41% in February, and the group's annual inflation rose by 8.86 points to 64.47%.
Annual inflation in unprocessed food increased by 14.95 points to 69.93%, while annual inflation in processed food increased by 3.22 points to 59.42%.
Rising at a rate higher than seasonal averages with 32.16%, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables were the key driver of the annual unprocessed food inflation in February.
Other unprocessed food items, including red meat, pulses, dried nuts and potatoes increased notably, while fats and oils, sugar and sugar-related products and grain products in the processed food group rose significantly as well.
International agricultural commodity prices seem to have a negative impact on these items, directly or indirectly.
The VAT reduction of food items from 8% to 1% in mid-February prevented a more negative outlook, while leading indicators point to a more positive outlook for the food group in March, supported by the prolonged effect of the VAT cut.
While energy prices rose by 4.00% in February, annual inflation in the energy group increased by 6.60 points to 82.98%.
Recent geopolitical developments led to a global upsurge in prices of crude oil, natural gas and solid fuel, aggravating the pressure on domestic prices.
Against this background, price hikes were widespread in February, with fuel oil prices soaring notably by 10.10%.
On the other hand, the grading in residential electricity tariffs was adjusted, which pulled electricity prices down by 4.84%.
In addition, the VAT rate was reduced in early March.
Accordingly, electricity prices are expected to decelerate further in March.
In February, annual core goods inflation increased by 5.89 points to 54.38%.
Annual inflation has been high across all subgroups in this period.
Prices of durable goods increased relatively mildly by 3.27% compared to previous months, and the annual inflation in this group rose by 4.70 points to 60.94%.
Prices of white goods and furniture items increased markedly, while automobile prices maintained a moderate course.
In other core goods, annual inflation reached 61.89% with an increase of 10.66 points.
Price hikes in other core goods were widespread, with medicine prices stood out due to backward exchange rate indexing.
Prices 1 of clothing and footwear registered a slight increase by 0.23% in February, contrary to seasonal norms, and annual inflation in this subgroup was calculated as 26.55%.
Services prices rose by 3.63% in February, and annual services inflation increased by 3.33 points to 32.89%.
Annual inflation increased across all subgroups, but more markedly in transport and hotels-restaurants.
Prices in restaurants-hotels increased by 4.54% due to catering services, and annual inflation reached 55.20%, owing to the increases in the costs of main inputs such as food and energy.
Fuel price changes also had an adverse impact on transport services led by intercity passenger transport by road and urban passenger transport by bus.
Prices in this group went up by 5.73%, and annual transport inflation rose to 46.87%.
The subgroup of other services also saw widespread price increases, particularly in health and education services.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in rent remained high.
According to the March results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 6.41 points to 40.47%, while the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 1.60 points to 26.43%.
On the other hand, long-term inflation expectations lost its upward momentum in March, and the five-year ahead inflation expectation dropped by 0.24 points to 8.81%.
However, geopolitical risks that evolved into conflict and the variants, keep the downside risks to regional and global economic activity alive and further increases the uncertainty.
Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors that have become more evident particularly in energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they still continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs at a slower pace.
Portfolio flows to emerging economies suggest that inflows to equity markets have recently continued albeit at a slower pace and bond markets have posted outflows.
Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by rising energy costs resulting from the heightened regional conflict, temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, supply side factors such as the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices, supply constraints, and demand developments.
Despite the mild course in exchange rates, the commodity price increases that became more evident due to lingering supply-side problems and the geopolitical unrest affected producer prices negatively in February.
While annual inflation increased across all subgroups, the energy group diverged negatively in line with international developments.
Across subgroups, 2 monthly changes were remarkable in electricity-gas production and distribution, crude oil- natural gas, main pharmaceutical, wood and construction related products.
Economic activity remained strong in the final quarter of 2021, with the help of both domestic and external demand.
In this period, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by 9.1% on an annual basis while it increased by 1.5% quarter-on-quarter in seasonally and calendar- adjusted terms.
Accordingly, overall 2021 growth became 11%.
On the production side, industrial and services sectors were the main drivers of annual and quarterly growth in the final quarter whereas the construction sector limited growth.
On the expenditures side, the main driver of quarterly growth was final domestic demand led by private consumption while net exports contributed to quarterly growth by 0.9 points.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of robust external demand even some regional differences emerge.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production declined by 2.4% month-on-month in January.
However, it is assessed that electricity and natural gas outages in industrial plants in the last ten days of the month were effective in this decline and the production remains strong when these effects were excluded.
In terms of export intensity, industrial production is stronger than implied by the general index in exporting sectors excluding other transportation.
Industrial turnover indices also reveal that external demand continued to support industrial production in January.
On the other hand, retail sales volume indices declined also in January, indicating a loss of momentum in domestic demand.
High-frequency data suggest that production and foreign trade indicators posted some recovery in February after registering declines due to natural gas and electricity outages in January.
As of February, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high.
Firms’ existing domestic and external orders as well as expectations for future orders reveal that external demand remains strong while domestic demand is expected to increase although it has declined slightly.
On the other hand, the credit card spending increased substantially on a monthly basis in February.
Developments in the labor market are in tandem with the outlook of economic activity.
In January, employment decreased by a mere 0.1% compared to the previous month.
With the effect of the decrease in the participation rate, seasonally adjusted total unemployment rate remained unchanged month-on-month and was recorded at 11.4%.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the positive outlook in the labor market is maintained.
The recent strong course of energy imports has been affecting the current account balance adversely.
While the current account deficit was USD 7.1 billion in January, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 5.3 billion to USD 20.2 billion.
Provisional foreign trade data indicated that, the strong course of exports in February continued recently despite regional differences, while imports increased due to high energy and commodity prices.
In this context, regional losses occur in exports in the short term due to the heightened military conflict.
It is observed that, short-term loses are largely compensated by the increase in exports to other countries thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification flexibility of the exporting firms.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, risks on current account balance due to energy prices are closely monitored.
Sustainable current account balance is important for price stability.
The monetary policy stance will be determined by taking into account the evaluations on the source and permanence of risks, along with the extent to which they can be contained by monetary policy, and with a focus on achieving the sustainable price stability target, in a cautious manner.
In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, a liraization- oriented approach that also addresses risks to financial stability will continue to be followed.
The Committee also assesses that credit growth including long-term investment loans and the targeted use of accessed funds for real economic activity is important for financial stability.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively pursued for achieving sustainable price and financial stability once global peace is restored and base effects are ceased.
While cumulative impact of the recent policy decisions is being monitored, to create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira- denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
In March, consumer prices increased by 5.46%, and annual inflation surged by 6.70 points to 61.14%.
The upward trend in international commodity prices since the beginning of the year has become more evident in this period amid geopolitical developments, with historic monthly rebounds in March, primarily in energy, metal, food and agricultural commodities.
These developments had an impact on domestic energy and food prices in particular.
In core goods, annual inflation remained flat in clothing and footwear, but rose in other subgroups.
In the services group, developments in transport and restaurants-hotels stood out in line with the outlook for energy and food prices.
Stronger increases in international commodity prices and supply chain disruptions continued to drive producer prices up.
Against this background, annual inflation of B and C indices increased further in March.
Food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 4.73% in March, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 5.86 points to 70.33%.
In March, the FAO international food price index in US dollars soared by 12.64%, hitting its all-time high.
While this upsurge was driven by cereal, vegetable oil and meat prices, the prices of sugar and dairy products also increased substantially.
Significant increases in food and agricultural commodity prices due to geopolitical developments exerted pressure on domestic prices, whereas the carry-over effects of the VAT cut in staple food items averted a more negative outlook.
In March, annual inflation continued to rise in both unprocessed and processed food groups, more visibly in unprocessed food.
In unprocessed food, seasonally-adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables remained relatively flat, whereas in other unprocessed food group, red and white meat prices, which were affected by higher feed prices amid rising external price pressures, diverged negatively along with potato and egg prices.
In processed food group, the increase in bread and cereals was mainly determined by wheat prices, while fats and oils, meat products, sugar and non-alcoholic beverages also stood out.
Leading indicators suggest that the rise in food inflation persists due to supply constraints and the lagged effects of the increase in international food and agricultural commodity prices.
Energy prices increased by 11.01% in March, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 19.96 points to 102.94%.
Due to accelerating international energy prices amid geopolitical risks, fuels, bottled gas and solid fuels saw significant month-on-month increases.
Meanwhile, the decline in residential electricity prices with the increase in the gradual tariff limit and the VAT reduction restrained energy inflation.
Prices of core goods rose by 4.56% in March, and annual core goods inflation increased by 4.81 points to 59.19%.
Annual inflation remained flat in the clothing and footwear group, standing at 26.54%.
In this period, prices of durable goods accelerated somewhat by 5.09%, primarily led by developments in automobile and furniture items.
The price increase in the other core goods group remained strong, with a monthly increase of 5.36%.
The VAT 1 reduction on hygiene products from 18% to 8% in April is expected to affect the other core goods inflation positively.
Services prices increased by 4.19% in March, and annual services inflation went up by 3.83 points to 36.72%.
Annual inflation rose across all subgroups, most notably in transport and restaurants-hotels.
Fuel price increases weighed on transport services.
The price increases in intercity passenger transport by road as well as in urban passenger transport by bus and railway were notable in this development.
The effect of fuel price developments on transport services is expected to persist also in April.
Increases in the costs of main inputs had a negative impact on the restaurants-hotels group, and annual inflation in this group reached 60.40%.
The increases in international commodity prices, which accelerated significantly due to geopolitical developments, do not only affect tradable goods but also push services inflation up particularly through fuel and food prices.
In the subgroups of other services, price increases spread across sub-items, most notably in education services, where backward indexation is common, and insurance.
On the other hand, seasonally adjusted data indicate that the monthly increases in rent slowed down.
Prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 3.91% in March due to the producer firms driven increases in cigarette prices, and annual inflation rose to 51.43%.
This rise will have carry-over effects in April as well.
According to the April results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 5.97 points to 46.44%, while the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 1.98 points to 28.41%.
Currently, the 24-month-ahead and five-year- ahead inflation expectations stand at 17.68% and 9.23%, respectively.
Leading indicators show that the recovery in the global economy is sustained with some deceleration.
However, the ongoing geopolitical risks keep the downside risks to regional and global economic activity alive and increase the uncertainty.
Concern over global food security, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors that have become more evident particularly in energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Portfolio flows to emerging economies moved in tandem with the risk appetite and decreased until the last week of March before rebounding with equity markets in the lead.
Increase in inflation in the recent period has been driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
Increases in commodity prices that grew stronger amid geopolitical developments accompanied by ongoing supply problems weighed further on producer prices in March.
As a result, annual producer inflation rose across all subcategories, especially in energy prices.
Adverse impacts of high levels recorded in energy prices became more evident.
Across subcategories, monthly price changes were more noticeable in refined petroleum products, construction-related products, metals, production and distribution of electricity and gas, main pharmaceuticals, tobacco and food products.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of more robust external demand, even if some regional differences emerge.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production rose by 4.4% month-on-month in February, indicating that production losses stemming from electricity and natural gas outages in January were compensated.
Thus, production rose by 2% quarter-on-quarter as of January and February averages.
Monthly increase in production spread across the sectors, while industrial production was stronger in exporting sectors.
Industrial turnover indices also reveal that external demand continued to support industrial production.
On the other hand, the January-February average of retail sales volume indices decreased compared to the previous quarter, indicating to a loss of momentum in domestic demand.
As of March, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high.
In the first quarter, firms’ registered domestic and export orders as well as expectations for future orders reveal that external demand remains strong, while domestic demand lost pace.
In fact, credit card spending indicates some recovery in the February- March period, yet fell slightly on a quarterly basis.
In February, seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate stood at 10.7%.
As of February, employment increased by 0.7% compared to the previous quarter.
The participation rate edged down by 0.2 points to 52.2% in February, and seasonally adjusted total unemployment rate in terms of January-February averages has declined by 0.2 points to 10.9% compared to the previous quarter.
The current account balance posted a deficit of USD 5.2 billion in February, while the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 2.7 billion to USD 21.8 billion.
Provisional data on foreign trade indicate that exports remained high in March, while imports increased due to high energy and commodity prices.
It is observed that these loses are compensated by the increase in exports to other countries thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification flexibility of exporting firms.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, risks on current account balance due to energy prices continue.
In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, a liraization-oriented approach that also addresses risks to financial stability will continue to be followed.
The Committee also assesses that credit growth including long-term investment loans and the targeted usage of accessed funds for real economic activity are important for financial stability.
In this context, the Committee decided to strengthen the macroprudential policy set.
The Committee expects the disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively pursued for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect and the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the lagged effects of exchange rate developments on inflation expectations, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market and price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures are being taken.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of the liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term target of 5 percent is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
Stability in the general price level will foster macroeconomic stability and financial stability through the fall in country risk premium, the continuation of the reversal in currency substitution and of the upward trend in foreign exchange reserves, and a durable decline in financing costs.
In April, consumer prices increased by 7.25%, and annual inflation surged by 8.83 points to 69.97%.
The rise in annual consumer inflation spread across sub-categories, which were driven mostly by the food group, followed by energy and services.
Food inflation remained on an upward track due to international price developments, rising input costs and unfavorable supply conditions.
Energy inflation was shaped by the developments in administered items, while annual inflation in services recorded increases across sub-categories, with transport and restaurants-hotels in the lead.
In core goods, annual inflation increased in durable goods, but declined in other sub-groups.
The VAT reduction introduced to the main hygiene products curbed inflation in other core goods.
The persisting high course in international commodity prices, increases in domestic energy prices and ongoing disruptions in supply chains continued to drive producer prices up.
Against this background, annual inflation of B and C indices continued to increase.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 13.38% in April, and became the main driver of consumer inflation.
Accordingly, annual inflation in this group went up by 18.77 points to 89.10%.
High levels in international agricultural commodity prices, elevated input costs and supply conditions led to overall price increases in April, and annual inflation reached 100.67% in the unprocessed food group and 78.09% in the processed food group.
On the unprocessed food front, rises in seasonally adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables were noticeable.
Meanwhile, in the other unprocessed food subcategory, red and white meat, which were affected adversely by feed prices, as well as potatoes and rice stood out with surging prices.
Milk prices increased amid the adjustment in raw milk reference price.
Negative effects of price increases in unprocessed food items were reflected on the related processed food items.
While annual inflation in bread and cereals reached 85.81%, price increases in cheese and other dairy products, sugar and related products, fats and oils, non-alcoholic beverages and meat products were notable.
Energy prices increased by 7.62% in April, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 15.26 points to 118.20%.
This rise was driven mainly by natural gas and tap water prices among administered items, while fuel, solid fuel and bottled gas saw further price increases.
Even though international energy prices excluding natural gas had posted a slight fall in April, this was only temporary and energy prices rebounded in May due to geopolitical developments.
In April, prices of services increased by 4.74%, and annual inflation went up by 5.46 points to 42.18% in this group.
Annual inflation in the intercity and urban passenger transport group increased to 78.00% while that in restaurants-hotels group reached 69.26%.
Price increases 1 spread across items in other services.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted data indicate that the monthly rise in rents remained flat in April.
The annual core goods inflation increased by 2.39 points to 61.58%.
Annual inflation increased in durable goods, while it decreased in other sub-groups.
In April, prices of durable goods rose by 5.11%, mainly driven by the rise in furniture prices, followed by automobiles and white goods prices.
In other core goods group, the rise in prices of housing maintenance and repair, recreation and culture, and household products was remarkable, while the VAT reduction in basic hygiene products mostly reflected on prices, thereby preventing a more negative outlook.
In the clothing and footwear group, the monthly price increments for the new season remained lower than those in the previous year, thus annual inflation in this group decreased by 0.79 points to 25.75%.
In April, prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 4.02%, and annual inflation of the group rose to 56.38%.
The rise was affected by lingering effects of price increases in cigarette prices in March implemented by producer firms.
The uptrend is expected to continue due to the increase in cigarette prices imposed by producer firms in May.
The May results of the Survey of Market Participants suggest that inflation expectations have increased for all maturities, being more evident in shorter maturities.
The current year-end inflation expectation rose by 11.48 points to 57.92%, while the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 4.87 points to 33.28%.
Currently, the 24-month-ahead and five-year- ahead inflation expectations stand at 19.54% and 9.96%, respectively.
However, the escalation of ongoing geopolitical risks keeps the downside risks to regional and global economic activity alive and increase the uncertainty.
Increasing concern over global food security driven by trade restrictions, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors that have become more evident particularly in energy and food, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand.
Accordingly, while monetary policy steps of central banks in advanced economies vary with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they still continue their supportive monetary stances.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets both registered outflows in May in tandem with the global risk appetite.
The impact of such risks through the portfolio flows channel towards Türkiye is judged to prove to be relatively limited, considering the current levels of non-residents’ portfolio positions.
Increase in inflation is driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
Elevated levels of commodity prices, disruptions in supply chains, and increases in domestic energy costs continued to affect producer prices.
According to main industrial groupings, 2 annual inflation remained almost flat in intermediate goods, but increased in all other subcategories.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of more robust external demand even some regional differences emerge.
Despite having fallen by 1.8% month-on-month in March, seasonal and calendar adjusted industrial production remained strong.
Thus, production grew by 2% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter.
While production posted a quarterly growth across all sectors, industrial production was stronger in exporting sectors.
On the other hand, retail sales volume indices were down in the first quarter compared to the previous quarter, indicating a loss of momentum in domestic demand.
As of May, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high.
Firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that external demand remains strong in the second quarter.
On the other hand, card spending data point to a recovery in domestic demand for the April-May period.
Although in the first quarter employment increased by 0.7% compared to the previous quarter, the seasonally adjusted total unemployment rate rose by 0.1 percentage points to 11.4% due to the increase in the participation rate.
In this period, industrial employment grew on the back of external demand, while services employment increased amid stronger tourism.
Non-farm employment rose despite the decline in construction employment.
The recent strong course of energy imports has been affecting the current account balance.
The Current Account Balance (CAB) registered a deficit of USD 5.6 billion in March 2022, while the annualized current account deficit surged by USD 2.2 billion to USD 24.2 billion.
According to provisional external trade data, exports remained strong in April, while imports remained high due to energy and commodity prices.
On the other hand, it is observed that short-term regional losses caused by the conflict are compensated by the increase in exports to other countries thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification flexibility of exporting firms.
The Committee also assesses that the credit growth including the long-term investment loans and targeted usage of accessed funds for real economic activity is important for financial stability.
In this context, the Committee will decisively continue to implement the strengthened macroprudential policy set by taking additional measures.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of strengthened measures for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the 3 base effect and the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT.
The collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, will be implemented.
Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market and price stability are being analyzed and necessary policy measures are being taken.
Consumer prices rose by 2.98% in May, while annual inflation increased by 3.53 points to 73.50%.
Up across all subcategories, annual consumer inflation was mostly driven higher by core goods and services.
Annual inflation increased in all subcategories of core goods.
On the services front, annual inflation was relatively flat for transportation services, but went up in other subcategories, especially in restaurants-hotels.
As for the food category, annual inflation declined in unprocessed food due to the partial correction in vegetable prices, but continued to rise in processed food.
The outlook for energy inflation was largely dominated by changes in municipal water tariffs and fuel prices.
Producer prices increased further due to international commodity prices, rising domestic energy prices and ongoing supply chain disruptions.
Thus, annual inflation went up in B and C indices.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.63% in May, while annual inflation rose by 2.53 points to 91.63% in this category.
Annual inflation fell by 3.06 points to 97.61% in unprocessed food but increased by 7.92 points to 86.01% in processed food.
Across items of unprocessed food, seasonally adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables recorded a decline due to the correction in vegetable prices.
Across items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables, prices of red meat, white meat, milk, rice and dried nuts saw an increase, whereas egg prices dropped.
Despite the decline in unprocessed food inflation, processed food inflation remained on the rise.
In the bread and cereals item, where the effects of grain price developments were observed, annual inflation was realized at 90.69 percent, as prices increased by 3.65 percent.
Monthly price hikes were more pronounced for processed food items excluding bread and cereal due to fats-oils, tea-coffee, meat products, sugar and related products, and especially cheese and other dairy products.
Energy prices rose by 2.90 % in May, and annual energy inflation increased by 3.01 points to 121.21%.
This was mostly driven by administered municipal water tariffs and fuel prices led by Turkish lira-denominated oil prices.
In this period, solid fuel prices continued to increase, especially for coal, while bottled gas prices were slightly down relative to international butane and propane prices.
Prices for services rose by 3.73% in May, and annual services inflation rose by 3.60 points to 45.78%.
Annual inflation was relatively flat in transportation services, but was higher in other subcategories, with restaurants-hotels in the lead.
Annual inflation increased by 7.57 points to 76.83% in restaurants-hotels, but remained flat at 78.16% in transportation services due to the base effect.
Prices for the other services subcategory rose by 2.97% on the back of package tours dominated by pilgrimage tours that are about to resume, while seasonally adjusted data indicate that there has been some acceleration in monthly rent increases.
The annual core goods inflation increased by 3.74 points to 65.32% in May.
Annual inflation rose across all subgroups.
Durable goods prices were up by 2.14% in May, led by furniture, 1 automobile and white goods.
Thus, annual inflation in durable consumption goods reached 76.75%.
Monthly inflation in the other core goods group stood at 3.94%.
While this was mainly driven by household-related cleaning materials, personal care products and housing maintenance and repair materials, price increases spread across the group.
Clothing and footwear prices rose by 4.63% in May, driving annual inflation up by 3.52 points to 29.27%.
In May, alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 6.53% and annual inflation rose to 66.62%.
While this rise was determined by the price increases by producer firms, the contribution of this group to monthly consumer inflation stood at 0.28 points.
According to the June results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 6.67 points to 64.59% and the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 4.63 points to 37.91%.
The 24-month-ahead inflation expectation is 22.04%.
The escalating geopolitical risks were adversely realized in the first half of the year and caused a weakening in the worldwide economic activity.
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards.
Increasing concern over global food security driven by trade restrictions, high course of commodity prices, the persistence of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly in food and energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies increased due to their diverse economic outlook.
It is observed that central banks have increased their efforts to develop new supportive measures and tools to cope with the increasing uncertainties in financial markets.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets both continued to register outflows in June in tandem with the global risk appetite.
The impact of such risks through the portfolio flows channel towards Türkiye is expected to remain relatively limited, considering the current levels of non-residents’ portfolio positions.
As a result of geopolitical developments, the high levels seen in commodity prices, primarily in energy and agricultural products, the ongoing disruptions in supply chains and increases in domestic energy costs continue to affect producer prices.
Across main industrial categories, annual inflation was almost flat in intermediate goods, but was up in other subgroups, energy in particular.
The energy producer prices increased by 27.65% month-on-month, driven by the rise in natural gas prices.
Economic activity remained strong in the first quarter of 2022.
In this period, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 7.3% year-on-year, and by 1.2% quarter-on-quarter in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms.
On the production side, the main determinants of annual growth in the first quarter were services and the industry sectors, while the 2 construction sector limited growth.
On the expenditures side, the main driver of annual growth was the final domestic demand led by private consumption, while the contribution of net exports was 3.5 points.
Machinery-equipment investments, a component of total investments, continued to grow on a yearly basis.
As a matter of fact, as of the first quarter of the year, the share of machinery-equipment investments and net exports in GDP reached its highest level over the last decade.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that robust growth in the beginning of the year continues in the second quarter as well, with the support of external demand.
Industrial production adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects remained flat in April compared to the previous month.
Thus, production grew by 0.3% in April compared to the previous quarter.
The industrial production of sectors with higher export shares posted a strong growth in this period.
Industrial turnover indices also revealed that external demand continued to support industrial production.
Meanwhile, retail sales volume indices were up in April compared to the previous quarter, indicating the ongoing recovery in domestic demand.
Investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months remain high.
Firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that external demand maintains its supportive course in the second quarter.
On the other hand, card spending data confirm the recovery trend in domestic demand for the April-May period.
In April, the seasonally-adjusted total employment rate rose by 1.4% (approximately 408 thousand people) month-on-month.
As the labor participation rate increased by 0.7 percentage points, the seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate has remained almost flat since the previous month at 11.3%.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment is maintained.
The recent strong course of energy imports still affects the current account balance.
In April 2022, the Current Account Balance (CAB) registered a deficit of USD 2.7 billion, while the annualized current account deficit rose by USD 1.2 billion to USD 25.7 billion.
According to the provisional external trade data, exports remained strong in May, while imports remained high due to energy prices.
On the other hand, it is observed that short-term regional losses caused by the conflict are compensated by the increase in exports to other countries thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification flexibility of exporting firms and regional exports exceeded pre-conflict levels.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity, mainly energy, prices the ongoing upward trend in services revenues further supports the current account balance.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases with tourism-related improvements, risks on current account balance due to energy prices continue.
In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, a liraization-oriented approach will be maintained that also addresses risks to financial stability.
Credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are 3 closely monitored.
The Committee will continue to implement the strengthened macroprudential policy set decisively and take additional measures when needed.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect and the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira- denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
The collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, will continue to be implemented to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
Following these actions, it is observed that interest rates of long- term fixed-income and TL-denominated securities converged to policy rates and yield curve shifted downward in all maturities, increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Similarly, the Committee considers that the improvement in financing costs of loans, which provide efficiency gains in targeted areas, is important for increasing the efficiency of the monetary transmission mechanism.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of the liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
Consumer prices rose by 4.95% in June and annual inflation increased by 5.12 points to 78.62%.
In this period, annual consumer inflation was up across all subcategories, mostly driven by energy (accounting for 3.65 points of the 5.12-point-rise).
The rise in energy inflation was determined by fuel, natural gas and electricity items due to the outlook for Turkish lira-denominated international energy prices.
Annual inflation was up in all subcategories in the services group.
While annual food inflation declined in the unprocessed food group thanks to the ongoing correction in vegetable prices, it continued to increase in the processed food group.
Annual inflation in core goods posted a decline across subcategories except for durable goods.
The rise in producer prices persisted as a result of the increase in international and domestic energy prices, and ongoing supply chain disruptions.
Against this background, while the seasonally-adjusted monthly changes of B and C indices slowed down, their annual inflation increased.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 2.09% in June, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 2.30 points to 93.93%.
Annual inflation fell by 5.96 points to 91.65% in unprocessed food, but increased by 10.03 points to 96.04% in processed food.
In unprocessed food, seasonally-adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables recorded a decline due to the ongoing correction in vegetable prices.
Across unprocessed food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables, prices of rice, potato and dried nuts, in addition to milk, affected by the raw milk reference price adjustment, came to the forefront.
Despite the decline in unprocessed food inflation, processed food inflation increased further.
The monthly price increase in the processed food group was of 7.53%, mostly driven by cheese and other dairy products, bread and cereals, nonalcoholic beverages, tea, and products related to sugar.
Energy prices rose by 16.16% in June, and annual energy inflation increased by 30.12 points to 151.33%.
Price increases spread across the group, led by fuel and administered prices.
Gaining momentum due to the TL-denominated international oil prices, fuel prices rose by 21.88%, and annual inflation in this subgroup reached 251.98%.
Due to the developments in global energy prices, residential natural gas and electricity prices went up in this period by 25.11% and 15.01%, respectively.
Prices of services rose by 3.98% in June, and annual services inflation stood at 48.69%.
Annual inflation increased in all subcategories.
International energy and agricultural commodity prices continued to affect services inflation.
In the restaurants-hotels group, prices rose by 5.42%, and annual inflation hit 79.55%.
Transport services recorded price increases of 4.57% due to intercity passenger transport tariffs via highway, railway as well as transport by air.
Thus, annual inflation in the transport group reached 81.83%.
Prices in the other services subcategory rose by 3.14%.
Driven by internet and telephone call charges, communication 1 services prices rose by 3.16%.
Rents increased by 3.11% month-on-month, and the seasonally-adjusted data suggested an acceleration in monthly increases.
Annual core goods inflation edged down by 0.46 points to 64.86% in June.
In this period, annual inflation receded in clothing-footwear and other core goods groups, but rose in durable goods.
Driven by furniture and automobile items, the monthly price increase in durable goods became 3.65%, and the group’s annual inflation hit 77.90%.
On the other core goods front, annual inflation fell by 0.94 points to 70.64%.
Monthly price increases in the clothing and footwear group remained flat, while annual inflation declined by 2.92 points to 26.35%.
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 2.61% and annual inflation reached 70.99% in June, due also to raised taxes in prices of alcoholic beverages.
The contribution of this group to monthly consumer inflation stood at 0.12 points.
According to the July results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 5.35 points to 69.94% and the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 2.32 points to 40.23%.
The 24-month-ahead inflation expectation is 24.27%.
The escalating geopolitical risks have continued to have negative impacts and caused further weakening in the worldwide economic activity.
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and the likelihood of a recession has increased.
Increasing concern over global food security driven by trade restrictions, high and volatile course of commodity prices, and the persistence of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly in food, have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices, imbalances between supply and demand, and rigidities in labor markets.
The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continues due to their diverse economic outlook.
It is observed that central banks have increased and diversified their efforts to develop new supportive measures and tools to cope with the increasing uncertainties in financial markets.
The strengthening US dollar on a global scale due to rising financial uncertainties exerts pressure on the currencies of other countries.
While the currencies of emerging economies depreciated significantly against the US dollar in July, the Turkish lira diverged relatively in a positive manner.
Due to the impact of the policy steps taken within the scope of the liraization strategy, Türkiye's Turkish lira-denominated government bond yields, especially in long maturities, performed more favorably in this period compared to peer economies.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in July in line with the global risk appetite.
Moreover, the volatility in the long-term bond yields in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
Increase in inflation is driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
Amid geopolitical tensions, rising international and domestic energy prices and ongoing supply chain disruptions continue to affect producer prices.
Across main industrial groupings, annual inflation was up in all sub-groups, with energy inflation in the lead.
Robust growth in the beginning of the year continued in the second quarter as well, with the support of external demand.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production increased by 0.5% month-on-month and by 13.3% year-on-year in May.
Thus, production grew by 0.5% as of May compared to the previous quarter.
The quarterly increase in industrial production of sectors with higher export shares was stronger than that of other sectors.
Industrial turnover indices also showed that external demand continued to support industrial production.
Retail sales volume indices, on the other hand, rose by 4% quarter-on- quarter as of May, pointing to continued recovery in domestic demand.
On the other hand, while continuing to rise throughout the second quarter, card spending indicated a slowdown in domestic demand towards the end of the quarter.
Developments in the labor market display a strong outlook in tandem with the outlook of economic activity.
Job creation in the post-pandemic recovery period have been more pronounced, especially in industrial and services sectors, compared to peer economies.
In fact, seasonally-adjusted total employment grew by 1.2% (approximately by 358 thousand people) month-on-month in May.
The 0.4-point increase in labor force participation curbed the decline in seasonally-adjusted unemployment.
Thus, unemployment fell by 0.3 points from the previous month to 10.9%.
In addition, survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment is maintained, albeit at a slightly slower pace.
In May 2022, the Current Account Balance (CAB) registered a deficit of USD 6.5 billion, while the annualized current account deficit rose by USD 3.2 billion to USD 29.4 billion.
The fact that anticipated exports were brought forward due to the Ramadan Feast in the first week of the month was influential in high current account deficit in May.
According to the provisional external trade data, in June, exports remained strong while imports continued to increase despite the partial decline in energy imports.
Meanwhile, it is observed that short-term regional losses caused by the conflict are compensated by the increase in exports to other countries thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification flexibility of exporting firms.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity, mainly energy prices, the ongoing upward trend in services revenues further supports the current account balance.
While the share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the tourism-led improvement in current account balance continues with a solid pace.
On the other hand, high course of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on the current account balance alive.
In formulating the monetary policy towards achieving the sustainable price stability objective, a liraization-oriented approach will be maintained that also addresses risks to financial 3 stability.
Despite losing its momentum, credit growth, and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process is finalized, will continue to be implemented to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
The rise in the demand for long-term fixed-income and Turkish lira- denominated assets and the course of the yield in tandem with the direction of the efficiency of monetary transmission is closely monitored.
Along with credit growth, the Committee will also consider the improvement in financing costs of loans providing efficiency gains in targeted areas so as to maintain the transmission.
Consumer prices rose by 2.37% in July and annual inflation increased by 0.98 points to 79.60%.
In this period, annual consumer inflation decreased in energy whereas it went up in other groups, with core goods and services having a significant impact on the rise in inflation.
Annual inflation increased across the core goods group, while in the services group it rose in all subgroups other than restaurants-hotels.
In the food group, annual inflation slightly declined in unprocessed food whereas it remained on the rise in processed food.
Energy inflation registered a decline on the back of fuel and bottled gas prices that decreased in line with the developments in international energy prices.
Despite the decline in prices of refined petroleum products and base metals driven by international commodity prices, producer inflation remained elevated due to other energy items in particular.
Against this background, the rise in the annual inflation of core indicators continued.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 3.15% in July, and the group's annual inflation rose by 0.72 points to 94.65%.
While annual inflation edged down by 0.65 points to 91.00% in unprocessed food, it increased by 1.98 points to 98.02% in processed food.
Seasonally-adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, which had registered a decline in the last two months, rose in this period.
Across unprocessed food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables, the price increases in rice, eggs, potatoes and pulses were notable.
The 3.61% rise in processed food prices was driven by bread-cereals, coffee-tea-cocoa, and non- alcoholic beverages.
Energy prices receded by 3.13% in July, and the group’s annual inflation fell by 22.06 points to 129.27%.
This was led by the 8.18% decline in fuel prices following the decrease in international crude oil prices, and annual inflation in this subgroup dropped by 37.11 points to 214.87%.
In response to positive international developments, bottled gas prices also decreased by 3.98%.
On the other hand, municipal water and solid fuel prices continued to increase.
The decline in fuel prices is expected to affect energy prices favorably in August as well.
Prices of services rose by 3.20% in July, pushing annual services inflation up by 2.76 points to 51.45%.
In this period, annual inflation edged down in restaurants-hotels, but increased in other subcategories, more markedly in transport and rent.
Prices in transport services increased by 5.01% on the back of intercity passenger transport by rail and road, air transport and urban passenger transport by bus.
Thus, annual inflation in transport services rose to 90.71%.
Price increases in restaurants-hotels lost pace in July with 2.49%, and annual inflation came in at 79.14% in this subcategory.
In this period, internet fees stood out in communication services, while price increases were broad-based across other services.
The 4.24% increase signaled an acceleration in monthly rent inflation.
Prices of core goods rose by 3.67% in July, pushing annual core goods inflation up by 6.07 points to 70.93%.
Prices of durable goods rose by 3.85% due to prices of white goods and automobiles, and annual inflation hit 84.93% in this subcategory.
Prices of other core goods rose by 4.47% month-on-month, with medicines, household cleaning supplies and personal care products in the lead.
Prices of clothing and footwear increased by 1.74%, contrary to seasonal norms, and annual inflation rose by 5.10 points to 31.45% in this subcategory.
Prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 6.85% in July, pushing annual inflation up to 82.66% in this group.
This upsurge was attributed to the limited impact of the tax adjustment in cigarette prices as well as the price increments by producer companies.
According to the August results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year-end inflation expectations increased by 0.66 points to 70.60%, while 12-month ahead inflation expectations were revised upwards by 1.76 points to 41.99%.
24-month ahead inflation expectations remained almost flat at 24.35%.
The weakening effects of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase.
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and recession is increasingly assessed as an inevitable risk factor.
While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the upward trend in producer and consumer prices continues on an international scale.
The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continue due to their diverse economic outlook.
It is observed that central banks continue their efforts to develop new supportive measures and tools to cope with the increasing uncertainties in financial markets.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in August in line with the global risk appetite.
In Türkiye, there has been a significant increase in interest from foreign investors in capital markets investment instruments in recent weeks.
Increase in inflation is driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
Although the effects of falling international commodity prices have been visible in producer prices through refined petroleum products and base metal items, prices increased further across sub-groups in July, most notably in electricity, natural gas, basic pharmaceutical products and tobacco products.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production grew by 1.3% month-on-month and by 8.4% year-on-year in June.
Thus, industrial production increased by 1.1% compared to the previous quarter.
In sectors with relatively high export shares, industrial production growth was stronger on monthly and quarterly basis.
Although the retail sales volume index decreased by 0.7% month-on-month, it surged by 4.2% in the second quarter compared to the previous one.
In this context, in line with the data on card spending, domestic demand implies a recovery in the second quarter.
Developments in the labor market display a strong outlook in tandem with the outlook of economic activity in the second quarter.
Job creation in the post-pandemic recovery period has been more pronounced, especially in industrial and services sectors compared to peer economies.
In fact, seasonally-adjusted total employment grew by 2.5% (approximately by 765 thousand people) in the second quarter.
Considering the sectors that contribute to the employment increase, chiefly the industrial sector with a quarterly increase by 3.3%, it is observed that the growth dynamics are supported by structural gains.
As a result, unemployment fell by 0.4 points from the previous month to 10.6%.
Meanwhile, survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment is maintained, albeit at a slower pace.
Leading indicators for the third quarter point to some loss of momentum in economic activity.
Survey-based indicators such as the Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices as well as other high-frequency data hint at a slowdown in economic activity as of mid-August.
Registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations of manufacturing industry firms also point to a weakening in domestic and foreign demand.
Firms' investment and employment expectations, although being high, declined as of July.
Information obtained from field interviews also gave similar signals regarding the economic activity in this period.
In June 2022, the Current Account Balance registered a deficit of USD 3.5 billion, while the annualized current account deficit rose by USD 2.3 billion to USD 32.7 billion.
The provisional external trade data implies a limited slowdown in exports in July due to the religious holiday and following days-off as well as partial suspension of production in the automotive sector.
Meanwhile, thanks to the dynamic capacity and market diversification flexibility of exporting companies, exports remained strong despite geopolitical risks.
As for imports, although there has been a partial decline, the high level of energy imports and increasing gold imports limited this decline.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, the ongoing uptrend in services revenues continue to support the current account balance.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues.
The rate of credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored.
In addition, the recent increase in spread between policy rate and the loan interest rate is considered to reduce the effectiveness of monetary transmission.
In this context, the Committee decided to further strengthen the macroprudential policy set with tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism.
It is important that financial conditions remain supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties regarding global growth as well as escalating geopolitical risk.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 100 basis points, and has assessed that the updated level of policy rate is adequate under the current outlook.
Consumer prices rose by 1.46% in August, and annual inflation edged up by 0.61 points to 80.21%.
In this period, annual inflation receded in energy and food, whereas it went up in core goods and services.
Annual inflation increased in subgroups of core goods; in services, while dropped in transport, it rose in other subgroups of services.
In the food group, driven by prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, annual inflation fell in unprocessed food, but increased further in processed food.
Energy inflation registered a decline on the back of fuel prices that fell in tandem with the outlook for international crude oil prices.
In line with the fall in international commodity prices, the monthly increase in producer prices lost pace compared to past months, and annual inflation decreased somewhat.
Against this background, the rise in the annual inflation of B and C indices continued, while some core indicators such as seasonally-adjusted median inflation posted a limited decline.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 0.85% in August, while the group’s annual inflation dropped by 4.40 points to 90.25%.
While annual inflation fell by 11.49 points to 79.51% in unprocessed food, it increased by 2.36 points to 100.38% in processed food.
Seasonally-adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables recorded a decline in August.
In other unprocessed food, price hikes in eggs and rice were notable, while white meat and potatoes registered falling prices.
Meanwhile, the rise in processed food prices was driven by bread-cereals accompanied by sugar and related products as well as canned vegetables and non-alcoholic beverages.
Energy prices receded by 2.68% in August, and the group’s annual inflation fell by 7.54 points to 121.73%.
The decline of 7.79% in fuel prices following the fall in international crude oil prices was the main driver of energy prices also in August.
Prices of services rose by 3.16% in August, pushing annual services inflation up by 2.85 points to 54.30%.
In this period, while annual inflation receded slightly in the transport group due to the developments in fuel prices, it increased in other subgroups, most visibly in other services and rents.
Price increases were broad-based in the other services subgroup.
Education, due to the raised university tuitions, health, recreation-culture and insurance services driven by car insurance items stood out.
The monthly increase in the rents group remained high at 4.40%, and seasonally-adjusted data suggested an acceleration compared to previous months.
In the restaurants-hotels group, price increase was higher compared to the previous month, yet remained below those in the first half of the year.
In August, annual inflation in this subgroup edged up by 1.81 points and reached 80.95%.
In transport services, 1 increases in urban passenger transport, air passenger transport and cargo fees were notable, while the decline in intercity passenger transport by road kept subgroup’s price increase moderate, and annual inflation edged down by 0.42 points to 90.29%.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 5.98% points to 76.91% in August.
Price hikes in durable goods were driven by automobiles and white goods, and annual inflation in this group rose by 6.86 points and hit 91.79%.
Parallel to July, prices of clothing and footwear registered increases contrary to seasonal norms, and annual inflation rose by 5.93 points to 37.38% in this subgroup.
In other core goods, annual inflation increased by 4.41% to 80.12%, with household cleaning supplies, medicines and personal care products in the lead.
According to the September results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year-end inflation expectations decreased by 2.87 points to 67.73%, while 12-month ahead inflation expectations were revised downwards by 5.25 points to 36.74%.
Meanwhile, 24-month ahead inflation expectations dropped by 3.72 points to 20.63%.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in September in line with the global risk appetite.
Annual producer inflation decreased in August.
It is evaluated that the moderate course of international commodity prices and the declines in transport expenses have alleviated cost pressures to some extent.
Having surged due to geopolitical problems, natural gas prices continued to be the main factor deteriorating this outlook in August.
Across main industrial groupings, annual inflation declined in the energy group led by petroleum products, but increased in other subgroups in August.
While price increases became widespread across subgroups, tobacco products, other mining and quarrying products, basic pharmaceuticals and paper and paper products stood out.
Meanwhile, the effect of the positive outlook for 2 international commodity prices was more pronounced in refined petroleum products and base metals, and prices fell further in these subgroups.
A strong growth was observed in the first half of 2022.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data for the second quarter of 2022 indicated that economic activity maintained its strong course in the first quarter.
In this period, GDP increased by 7.6% year-on-year, and by 2.1% quarter-on-quarter in seasonal and calendar-adjusted terms.
Industrial value added increased by 7.8% on an annual basis thanks to the strong course of exports.
The value added of the services sectors increased by 11.9% on the back of the strong tourism activity despite the war.
The contribution of net exports to annual growth was 2.7 points.
Machinery- equipment investments, one of the subitems of investments, went up by 17.8% on an annual basis, showing an annual increase for eleven quarters in a row.
Since the beginning of July, leading indicators have been pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.
While industrial production decreased by 6.2% month-on-month in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms, it increased by 3.1% year-on- year in July.
After increasing by 1.9% and 0.9% in the first two quarters of the year, industrial production contracted by 5.1% in the third quarter due to the bridge days associated with the religious holidays and partial suspension of production in factories in July.
While, the month- on-month decline in industrial production spread across sectors in July, clothing, textiles, basic metals and other transportation sectors posted higher monthly production losses of 8.6%, 10%, 9.3% and 19.4%, respectively.
Although the retail sales volume index decreased slightly in July compared to the previous month, credit card spending continued to increase in the July-August period compared to the previous quarter.
Leading indicators for the third quarter continue pointing to loss of momentum in economic activity due to the decreasing foreign demand.
Survey-based indicators such as Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices as well as other high-frequency data point to a quarterly slowdown in economic activity as of mid-September.
Registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations of manufacturing industry firms reveals a weakening in total demand, which is more pronounced for external demand.
Firms' investment and employment expectations declined compared to the second quarter.
In July, employment was about 3 million higher than its pre-pandemic level (February 2020).
In fact, compared to peer economies, job creation has been stronger.
Considering the sectors that contribute to the employment increase, it is observed that the growth dynamics are supported by structural gains.
On the other hand, on a monthly basis compared to the previous month, seasonally adjusted employment decreased by 148,000 persons leading 0.5% decrease in July.
In this period, seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate decreased from 53.1% in the previous month by 0.5 points to 52.6% and is still 1.7 percentage points above its pre-pandemic level (February 2020).
In July, on the unemployment rate, the downward effect of the decline in labor force participation exceeded the upward effect of the decline in employment.
Thus, the unemployment rate declined and dropped by 0.3 points from the previous month to 10.1%.
Survey indicators and high- frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment has lost momentum.
The recent strong course of energy and gold imports still affects the current account balance.
The current account balance posted a deficit of USD 4.0 billion in July 2022, while the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 3.7 billion to USD 36.6 billion.
When the provisional foreign trade data for August is evaluated together with the high frequency data for September, it is observed that uptrend in the first half of the year in seasonally adjusted exports is replaced by a limited decline in the third quarter.
Imports, on the other hand, 3 strengthened on the back of high imports of energy and gold.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues thanks to the increase in per capita tourist spending.
On the other hand, high course of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive.
In addition, the spread between policy rate and the loan interest rates driven by the announced macroprudential measures is closely monitored.
The Committee will continue to further strengthen the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism.
It is important that financial conditions remain supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties regarding global growth as well as escalating geopolitical risks.
Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market, and price stability are being analyzed, and necessary policy measures are being taken.
Consumer prices rose by 3.08% in September and annual inflation increased by 3.24 points to 83.45%.
In this period, annual inflation decreased somewhat in the alcohol-tobacco-gold group whereas it went up in other groups.
The most significant contribution to the rise in inflation came from energy and services groups.
While the rise in energy inflation was driven by developments in items with administered prices such as electricity, natural gas, and municipal water as well as in solid fuel prices, fuel and bottled gas prices decreased in tandem with international crude oil prices.
In September, annual inflation increased in services and food groups.
In the core goods group, annual inflation decreased in durable goods while it rose in other subgroups.
As the domestic energy prices were affected by natural gas prices that remained elevated due to geopolitical developments, the rise in producer prices accelerated driven by electricity production and gas manufacturing.
Against this background, the seasonally adjusted monthly change in B and C indices decelerated somewhat while their annual inflation continued to increase.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.97% in September, and annual inflation rose by 2.80 points to 93.05% in this group.
Annual inflation increased by 2.88 and 2.52 points to 82.39% and 102.90% in unprocessed and processed food, respectively.
In unprocessed food, seasonally-adjusted data pointed to an upsurge in prices of fresh fruits and vegetables on the back of fresh fruit prices in September.
In other unprocessed food, price hikes were notable for rice, eggs and nuts, while potato and red meat prices decreased.
The increase in processed food prices was driven by bread and cereals as well as canned vegetables and sugar-related products.
Energy prices surged by 7.39% in September and annual inflation in this group rose by 11.25 points to 132.98%.
This was mainly driven by natural gas and electricity prices, which soared by 20.98% and 20.00%, respectively as a result of the changes in the residential tariffs.
Meanwhile, municipal water and solid fuel prices also posted large increases.
On the other hand, fuel oil and bottled gas prices decreased in this period following the decline in international crude oil prices.
Services prices were up by 3.90% in September, and the group's annual inflation increased by 3.46 points to 57.76%.
In this period, annual inflation increased across all subgroups, most visibly in transport services and rents.
The rise in transport prices was mainly led by price hikes in urban passenger transport by bus due to school bus fares as well as in passenger transport by air and railway, despite the decline in the fares of intercity passenger transport by road.
Against this backdrop, prices in transport went up by 6.95%, pushing annual inflation up by 7.69 points to 97.98%.
Rents posted a monthly increase of 5.45%, and seasonally- adjusted data pointed to a continued acceleration trend.
In the other services subgroup, the most significant items were education services due to the ongoing rises in university tuition 1 fees and insurance services due to compulsory vehicle insurance.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, prices increased at a more moderate pace compared to previous months, and annual inflation in this subgroup edged up by 0.39 points to 81.34%.
In September, annual inflation in core goods rose by 0.58 points to 77.49%.
The 0.98% increase in prices of durable goods was led by electric and non-electric appliances, whereas the decline in furniture prices had a positive contribution.
Thus, annual inflation in durable goods fell by 1.83 points to 89.96%.
Due to the start of the new season, annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group increased by 2.24 points to 39.62%.
In the other core goods subgroup, personal care products and household-related cleaning materials stood out, and the annual inflation in this group rose by 2.62 points to 82.74%.
According to the October results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year-end inflation expectations remained relatively flat at 67.78%, while 12-month ahead inflation expectations increased slightly by 0.60 points to 37.34%.
Meanwhile, 24-month ahead inflation expectations stood at 21.17%.
The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continue to increase due to their diverse economic outlook.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in October in line with the global risk appetite.
Despite moderate international commodity prices and transportation costs, natural gas prices that remained elevated due to geopolitical developments, affected domestic energy prices, leading to an increase in annual producer inflation driven by electricity production and gas manufacturing.
According to the main industrial groupings, annual inflation increased across subcategories, more markedly in energy and non-durable consumption goods.
Across sectors, in addition to electricity production and gas manufacturing, which recorded significant price increases amid high international natural gas prices, water treatment and 2 distribution, clothing, coal-lignite, beverages and construction-related products also saw notable price hikes.
Meanwhile, seasonally-adjusted underlying trend indicators for producer prices pointed that cost-based price pressures persisted, albeit at a weaker rate.
Leading indicators for the second half of the year continue pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.
While industrial production increased by 2.4 percent in August, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, compared to the previous month, it increased by 4.1 percent on an annual basis.
Thus, the monthly production loss in the previous month due to bridge days was partially compensated.
After growing by 1.9% and 0.9% in the first two quarters of the year, respectively, industrial production dropped by 3.9% in the third quarter as of August.
In this period, the quarterly decline in industrial production spread across all manufacturing sectors except vehicles.
The retail sales volume index increased quarter-on-quarter in August, but the quarterly growth rate slowed.
Similarly, the quarterly increase in credit card spending lost momentum in the third quarter.
Pressures on the manufacturing industry due to foreign demand and their currently limited impact on domestic demand and supply capacity are being monitored closely.
Survey-based indicators such as Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices as well as other high-frequency data point to a continued slowdown in economic activity.
Registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations of manufacturing industry firms reveals an ongoing weakening in total demand, which is more pronounced for external demand.
Firms' investment and employment expectations declined as of September compared to the second quarter.
Information obtained from field interviews also confirm this outlook for the economic activity in this period.
As of August, the quarterly employment growth slowed down in the third quarter in tandem with the decelerating economic activity.
The seasonally-adjusted employment as per the averages of July and August increased by 0.4% (116 thousand people) compared to the previous quarter, and stood approximately 3.4 million people above its pre-pandemic level (February 2020).
Nevertheless, this rate of increase remained below the quarterly employment growth in the first two quarters of 2022 (0.7% and 2.5%, respectively).
Meanwhile, compared to peer economies, job creation has been stronger.
The seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate on a quarterly basis, which fell by 0.4 points to 52.8% as of August, is approximately 2 points above its pre-pandemic level.
An evaluation on a monthly basis indicates that the downward effect of the August employment growth exceeded the upward effect of the increase in labor force participation on the unemployment rate.
Thus, the unemployment rate declined by 0.4 points compared to previous month and realized as 9.6%.
Survey indicators and high- frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment remains in place, albeit with a loss of momentum.
The strong course of energy and gold imports still affects the current account balance negatively.
While the current account balance posted a deficit of USD 3.1 billion in August 2022, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 4.2 billion to USD 40.9 billion.
The provisional foreign trade data for September and the high frequency data for October suggest that the deceleration in exports continues.
Having posted a limited deceleration excluding energy and gold, imports, on the other hand, have maintained their strength due to the high level of energy and gold imports.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, thanks to the increase in per capita tourist 3 spending, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues.
The effects of slowing foreign demand on aggregate demand conditions and production are closely monitored.
It is critically important that financial conditions remain supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties regarding global growth as well as further escalation of geopolitical risks.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 150 basis points.
The Committee evaluated taking a similar step in the following meeting and ending the rate cut cycle.
Consumer prices rose by 3.54% in October and annual inflation increased by 2.06 points to 85.51%.
In this period, annual inflation receded in energy and alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold groups, but increased in other groups, more markedly in food.
While price increases were widespread across the food group, the rise in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables continued in October, becoming the main driver of the increase in the group’s inflation.
Annual core goods inflation was up across all subgroups, while the increase in annual inflation in clothing and footwear, which saw the effects of the new season, was more limited compared to other subgroups.
In the services group, transportation services came to the forefront in line with the developments fuel prices as well as rents.
Despite the hikes in fuel and municipal water prices, annual energy inflation declined.
Having decreased somewhat in recent months, global natural gas prices remained still elevated and continued to negatively affect domestic energy prices.
As a matter of fact, domestic producer prices rose further in October due to contributions from electricity generation and gas production sectors.
Against this background, seasonally-adjusted monthly changes in B and C indices decelerated slightly, while their annual inflation continued to rise.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 6.00 points to 99.05%.
While price increases were wide-spread across the group, annual inflation went up by 9.85 points to 92.24% in unprocessed food, and by 2.42 points to 105.32% in processed food.
Seasonally- adjusted data indicated that the increase in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables in the unprocessed food group persisted in October.
In addition to fresh fruits and vegetables, the prices of eggs, nuts, rice, milk and red meat had an effect on the increase of prices in the unprocessed food subgroup.
In the processed food subgroup, the increasing trend in the prices of bread and cereals persisted, with cheese and other dairy products, sugar-related products and canned vegetables were the other subitems that came to the forefront.
Energy prices were up by 2.37% in October, and annual inflation in this group fell by 4.92 points to 128.06%.
The October price increase in the energy group was mainly driven by fuel prices, which rose by 3.15% in line with the rise in international crude oil prices.
Municipal water, which posted a price hike of 7.17% due to the carry-over effects from the previous month, and solid fuels, whose prices rose by 2.19%, were the other items that stood out.
Meanwhile, following the decline in international propane and butane prices, bottled gas prices fell by 1.69% and limited the increase of prices in the group.
Services prices were up by 2.63% in October, and the group's annual inflation increased by 2.48 points to 60.24%.
In this period, annual inflation increased across all subgroups, most visibly in transport services and rents, as in September.
The monthly increase in rents was 4.87%, pushing annual inflation in this subgroup up to 41.24%.
Seasonally-adjusted data indicate that the monthly increase in the rent subgroup declined slightly compared to the 1 previous month, yet remained high.
Developments in fuel prices caused transport services prices to increase by 1.97%.
Annual inflation in this subgroup rose by 4.22 points to 102.20% driven by urban passenger transport by bus as well as passenger transport by air.
Developments in the restaurants-hotels subgroup were led by catering services in line with the food inflation outlook.
Prices in other services were shaped mainly by various maintenance-repair, health services, recreation-culture items, and transportation insurance.
Annual inflation in core goods rose by 2.16 points to 79.65% in October.
Prices of durable goods rose by 2.57% in October, which was driven predominantly by white goods prices.
Thus, annual inflation in this subgroup climbed by 2.51 points to 92.47%.
With visible effects of the new season, annual inflation in the clothing and footwear group increased by 1.01 points to 40.63%.
Price hikes spread across the other core goods group, with personal care products and household-related cleaning materials still in the lead.
Prices rose by 2.96% in this subgroup, and annual inflation increased by 2.64 points to 85.38%.
Meanwhile, the tax base arrangement introduced to automobiles is expected to pull down the prices of automobiles in a certain segment in December, and affect the group's inflation positively.
According to the November results of the Survey of Market Participants, inflation expectations increased to some extent for the short term, but decreased for the long term.
12-month ahead inflation expectations rose slightly by 0.13 points to 37.47%.
On the other hand, 24-month ahead and 5-year ahead inflation expectations receded by 0.41 points to 20.76% and 0.17 points to 9.49%, respectively.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to high level of energy prices, imbalances between supply and demand, and rigidities in labor markets.
The divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continues to increase due to their diverse economic outlook.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in November parallel to the improved global risk appetite.
On the other hand, the volatility in the long-term bond yields in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
Due to the impact of the policy steps taken within the scope of the Liraization Strategy, Türkiye's Turkish lira-denominated government bond yields, especially in long maturities, performed more favorably in this period compared to peer economies.
In October, international commodity prices displayed a limited increase.
Recently, the pressure on commodity markets has eased due to the weakening trend in global demand conditions that has become more manifest.
Excluding energy, commodity prices slightly decreased in October.
In crude oil markets, where a volatile course prevails, prices have increased as a result of supply-side decisions.
Thanks to favorable stock developments, price movements in international natural gas prices have been more moderate.
In addition to these developments, the decreasing trend in international transportation costs continues.
On the other hand, despite the recent easing, the lagged effects of the cumulative cost increase in energy prices continue to affect domestic prices.
As a matter of fact, the lagged effects of the rise in natural gas prices were reflected on domestic industrial energy tariffs in October, and rising energy costs had widespread effects on producer prices.
An analysis of developments in producer prices by sectors reveals that following the price adjustments in electricity and natural gas prices, prices in the electricity-gas-steam and air conditioning and crude oil-natural gas sectors increased significantly and prices of clothing, refined petroleum products, non-metallic mineral products related to construction and beverages sectors displayed a noteworthy increase.
Despite the energy-related developments, the seasonally- adjusted underlying trend indicators of producer prices pointed out that the cost-based pressures continued, albeit at a weaker rate.
In September, industrial production adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects decreased by 1.6% quarter-on-quarter against a 0.4% rise on an annual basis.
Thus, having increased by 1.8% and 0.8% on a quarterly basis in the first two quarters, industrial production decreased by 4.1% in the third quarter.
While the retail sales volume index and credit card spending continued to increase in the third quarter, their growth momentum decelerated on a quarterly basis.
Pressures on the manufacturing industry due to foreign demand and their currently limited impact on domestic demand and supply capacity have been more pronounced.
In addition to industrial production realizations, survey-based indicators such as Business Tendency Survey, PMI and sectoral confidence indices as well as other high-frequency data point that the slowdown in economic activity continues.
In the third quarter, firms' investment expectations remained flat while employment expectations decreased compared to the previous quarter.
Information obtained from field interviews conducted in this quarter also confirm this outlook for the economic activity.
In the third quarter, quarterly employment growth slowed down in line with the deceleration in economic activity.
In the same period, seasonally adjusted labor participation rate decreased by 0.4 points.
On a monthly basis, the unemployment rate increased by 0.3 points in September compared to the previous month and was realized as 10.1%.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that, although losing momentum, the upward trend in employment is maintained.
On the other hand, employment gains are more positive compared to peer economies when the post-pandemic period is examined.
When the sectors that contribute to the increase in employment are considered, it is seen that the growth dynamics are supported by structural gains.
While the current account balance posted a deficit of USD 3 billion in September, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 5.7 billion to USD 39.2 billion.
The 3 provisional foreign trade data for October suggest that the deceleration in exports continues.
Having posted a slowdown excluding energy and gold, imports, on the other hand, have maintained their strength due to the high level of energy and gold imports.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, the ongoing uptrend in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
On the other hand, the high course of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive.
In addition, the spread between the policy rate and loan interest rates driven by the announced macroprudential measures is closely monitored.
The Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism and implement additional measures.
In this framework, targets encouraging conversion to Turkish lira deposits under the Liraization Strategy have been fulfilled, and starting from the end of the year, commission rates applicable to required reserves for banks’ foreign currency deposits will be varied according to targets regarding Turkish lira deposit shares only.
The Committee expects the disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
It is critically important that financial conditions remain supportive for the sustainability of structural gains in supply and investment capacity by preserving the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment in a period of increasing uncertainties regarding global growth as well as further escalation of geopolitical risks.
The Committee assessed that the financing costs of companies’ production-oriented activities should be set at reasonable levels in order to minimize the probable effects of aforementioned global uncertainties and risks on investment and production capacity via a proactive approach, thereby maintaining the supply continuity and the current surplus capacity.
Considering the increasing risks regarding global demand, the Committee evaluated that the current policy rate is adequate and decided to end the rate cut cycle that started in August.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira- 4 denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
The credit, collateral and liquidity policy actions, of which the review process has been finalized, will continue to be implemented to strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
The rise in the demand for long-term, fixed-income and Turkish lira-denominated assets and the course of the yield curve in tandem with the direction of the efficiency of monetary transmission are closely monitored.
The comprehensive set of policies to be implemented to boost the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism will be published in the 2023 Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy document in December.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of Liraization Strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium- term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
Consumer prices rose by 2.88% in November, and annual inflation decreased by 1.12 points to 84.39%.
The fall in annual inflation was driven by energy and core goods groups, and food price developments stood out in monthly inflation.
While annual inflation declined across all subgroups of core goods, energy prices were mild and annual energy inflation dropped due to the base effect.
Price increases spread across the food group, and the fresh fruits and vegetables item and prices of milk and dairy products were the leading drivers of the rise in annual food inflation.
Led by declines in refined petroleum product and base metal industry prices as well as in electricity and natural gas production prices, the monthly rate of increase in producer prices decelerated significantly.
Accordingly, annual producer inflation decreased.
Against this background, the slowdown in seasonally-adjusted monthly change in B and C indices continued while their annual inflation went down.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 3.50 points to 102.55%.
While price increases spread across the group, annual inflation increased by 5.00 points to 97.24% in unprocessed food, and by 2.03 points to 107.35% in processed food.
In unprocessed food, seasonally-adjusted data pointed to an accelerated rise in fresh fruit and vegetable prices in November, which was mainly driven by irregularities in the transition from field to greenhouse and the effect of new products included in the index in fruits.
The price hike in the unprocessed food subgroup was led by developments in prices of milk in particular, as well as rice, potatoes and pulses, in addition to prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
The increase in processed food prices was mainly driven by cheese and other dairy products, which were affected by raw milk prices, as well as bread and cereals, fats and oils, non- alcoholic beverages and canned vegetables.
Up by 1.28% in November, energy prices were milder compared to recent months, and annual inflation in this group decreased by 10.06 points to 118.00% due to the base effect.
The monthly increase is attributable to the 1.19% rise in fuel prices.
While municipal water prices went up by 3.33% in this period, bottled gas prices rose by 2.73% following the developments in international propane and butane prices.
Leading indicators suggest a fuel prices-led decline in energy prices in December due to the fall in crude oil prices.
Prices of services rose by 2.18% in November, and the group's annual inflation increased by 0.48 points to 60.72%.
In this period, annual inflation increased in rents and communication services, but decreased in other subgroups.
Seasonally-adjusted data indicate that the deceleration in the monthly increase of rents seen in the previous month also continued in November.
In the communications subgroup, the 2.96% increase in prices was mainly due to telephone call and internet fees, and annual inflation in this subgroup climbed to 29.17%.
Prices in the other services subgroup rose by 1.41% month-on-month, with maintenance- 1 repair, recreational and sporting services, household services and insurance services in the lead.
Driven by catering services, prices in the restaurants-hotels subgroup rose by 3.18%, whereas annual inflation dropped to 80.30% due to the base effect.
Prices in transport services remained relatively flat, and annual inflation fell by 1.54 points.
Annual inflation in core goods dropped by 3.54 points to 76.11%.
In this period, prices of durable goods picked up by 2.46%, which was driven predominantly by white goods, furniture and automobile prices but annual inflation in this subgroup decreased by 2.97 points to 89.50% due to the base effect.
Analyses of the course of producer and consumer prices in the durable consumption goods sector indicate that annual producer inflation and consumer inflation in this group are at similar levels as producer price developments have been reflected on consumer prices within a short time.
In the other core goods subgroup, prices increased by 2.17% month-on-month, still being led by personal care products and household-related cleaning materials, whereas annual inflation declined by 3.74 points to 81.64%.
Contrary to seasonal trends, prices in the clothing and footwear subgroup fell by 1.54% on a monthly basis in November, pulling annual inflation down by 4.41 points to 36.22%.
According to the December results of the Survey of Market Participants, inflation expectations decreased.
The current year-end inflation expectations dropped by 1.26 points to 66.80%.
The 12-month ahead inflation expectations were revised down by 2.55 points to 34.92%.
Meanwhile, 24-month ahead and 5-year ahead inflation expectations receded by 0.20 and 0.38 points to 20.56% and 9.11%, respectively.
Leading indicators point to continuation of recession concerns in developed economies as a result of ongoing geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes.
While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the high level in producer and consumer inflation continues on an international scale.
Additionally, financial markets started to adjust their expectations that the central banks would end the rate hike cycles in the near term on the back of the increasing recession risks.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in December parallel to the improved global risk appetite.
Increase in inflation has been driven by the lagged and indirect effects of rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
As for sub-groups, industrial metal prices increased and diverged from other sub-groups.
International crude oil prices slightly decreased in November, and the decrease became more evident in December.
The retreat in natural gas prices continued in November as well.
International transportation costs maintained their downward trend in November.
Moreover, exchange rates have followed a moderate course over the last few months.
On the back of these developments, the monthly rate of increase in producer prices slowed down significantly led by the decline in electricity and natural gas production, refined petroleum products and basic metal industry prices, and annual producer inflation decreased.
An analysis of annual inflation by main industry groups reveals that annual inflation decreased in all sub-groups, particularly in energy.
When analyzed by sectors, prices of electricity, natural gas manufacturing, refined petroleum products and base metal industry decreased, while prices of other mining and quarrying, leather, paper and non-metallic mineral products related to construction increased.
The seasonally-adjusted underlying trend indicators of producer prices point that the weakening trend in cost pressures continues.
A strong growth was observed in the first three quarters of 2022.
In the third quarter of 2022, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 3.9% on an annual basis, while growth in the first three quarters of the year was 6.2% compared to the same period of the previous year.
While the main driver of annual growth in the third quarter was the services sector, the contribution of the industrial sector to growth remained limited due to the weakening foreign demand.
While the share of sustainable components in economic growth increases, the share of the contributions of machinery-equipment investments and net exports accounted for approximately 62% of the average annual growth in the first three quarters of the year.
Leading indicators for the last quarter of the year continue pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.
In October, industrial production increased by 2.4%, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, on a monthly basis and it increased by 3.1% on an annual basis.
However, when production developments are analyzed at the sectoral level, it is observed that the production of computers, electronics, optical products and other transportation vehicles sectors, which have a relatively high export intensity and typically exhibit high volatility, increased significantly (27.5% and 53.2%, respectively) on a monthly basis; when these two sectors are excluded, the monthly increase in industrial production was 0.7%.
On a quarterly basis, the rise in industrial production in the fourth quarter as of October was 2.1%, while the increase in industrial production remained limited at 0.6% when typically volatile sectors were excluded.
The effects of foreign demand-based pressures observed in the manufacturing industry on domestic demand and supply capacity currently remain limited.
Survey-based indicators such as the Business Tendency Survey and PMI as well as other high-frequency data indicate that the deceleration in economic activity continues.
Manufacturing industry firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that the decrease in export order expectations continued in the last quarter, albeit at a slower pace, while domestic market order expectations remained flat.
In this context, despite the weakening in external demand, domestic demand has followed a relatively mild course.
As a matter of fact, while the retail sales volume index increased by 1.4% on a monthly basis in October, as of November, the uptrend in credit card expenditures continued in the last quarter.
Meanwhile, firms’ investment and employment expectations for the future decreased slightly in the last quarter.
In October, seasonally-adjusted employment grew by 0.7% monthly, and by 1.0% quarterly.
In the same period, seasonally-adjusted labor participation rate increased by 0.4 points to 53.5%.
Despite the rise in employment, seasonally-adjusted total unemployment rate 3 increased by 0.1 points in October compared to the previous month and reached as 10.2% due to the increase in the labor participation rate.
On the other hand, compared to peer economies, job creation has been stronger when the post-pandemic period is examined.
While the current account balance posted a deficit of USD 0.4 billion in October, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 4.5 billion to USD 43.5 billion.
The provisional foreign trade data for November suggest that seasonally-adjusted exports and imports increased on a monthly basis, partially offsetting the deceleration in the previous month.
Foreign trade deficit stood at USD 8.8 billion in November due to energy and gold imports, which maintained their relatively high levels.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, coupled with the acceleration in gold imports, the ongoing uptrend in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
The stronger-than-expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues.
On the other hand, high level of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive.
The Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism and the entire policy toolset, particularly funding channels, will be aligned with liraization targets.
The comprehensive set of policies to be implemented will be published in the 2023 Monetary and Exchange Rate document in December.
Considering the increasing risks regarding global demand, the Committee evaluated that the current policy rate is adequate.
To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened 4 liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT.
Consumer prices rose by 1.18%, and annual inflation decreased by 20.12 points to 64.27% in December.
Mild price movements pulled annual inflation down across all subgroups, while core goods and food groups became the main contributors of this fall.
Annual inflation decreased across all subgroups of core goods, with durable goods in the lead.
Prices in the energy group registered a decline due mainly to the fall in fuel prices.
Price increases in the food group remained more limited compared to previous months due to the correction in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Producer prices declined due to tumbling prices in petroleum and petroleum products as well as electricity and natural gas, while, sectors excluding energy recorded mild price increases.
The fall in headline producer prices led to a sustained decline in annual producer inflation.
Against this background, according to the seasonally adjusted data, the slowdown in monthly change in the B index continued, while the C index crept up, and annual inflation of both indices decreased significantly.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages fell by 24.68 points to 77.87%.
Annual inflation fell by 23.99 points to 73.25% in unprocessed food, and by 25.35 points to 82.00% in processed food, respectively.
Seasonally-adjusted data for the unprocessed food group points to a decline in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables in December, with a more pronounced fall in vegetable prices.
In the other unprocessed food subgroup, price hikes in red meat as well as rice and potato stood out.
In the unprocessed food group, monthly price increases decelerated to 2.23%.
The bread and cereals item recorded further increases in December, while fats and oils as well as canned vegetables in the other processed food group exhibited high price increases.
Energy prices decreased by 2.12% in December, and annual inflation in this group dropped by 23.57 points to 94.43%.
Despite the hike in municipal water prices, energy prices fell in this period due to tumbling fuel prices in tandem with the decline in international crude oil prices.
Services prices rose by 1.85% in December, and the group’s annual inflation decreased by 5.23 points to 55.49%.
Annual inflation dropped significantly in restaurants-hotels, transport and other services, while it increased in rents and communication.
Seasonally-adjusted data suggest that the monthly increase in the rent subgroup remained almost flat, but annual rent inflation increased further.
Prices in the restaurants-hotels subgroup were up by 2.61% in December, driven by catering services due to the recent developments in food prices.
Prices in the other services subgroup climbed by 1.65%, due to maintenance and repair, health, and recreational and cultural services.
The positive outlook for fuel prices was mirrored in transport services, and prices in this subgroup declined by 0.52%.
Annual inflation in core goods dropped by 27.15 points to 48.96%.
Annual inflation decreased across subgroups, more markedly in durable goods.
In durable goods, the tax base 1 adjustment led to a decrease in automobile prices, while the ongoing upward trend in white goods and furniture prices pushed the prices in this subgroup up by 1.88%.
Medicine prices increased due to the revision of the reference euro exchange rate, and accelerated other core goods inflation (3.56%).
Prices of clothing and footwear fell by 1.46%, pulling annual inflation down by 25.01%, and continued to affect annual core goods inflation favorably.
The January results of the Survey of Market Participants suggested that inflation expectations decreased further.
The 12-month ahead inflation expectation was down by 4.48 points to 30.44%, and the 24-month ahead inflation expectation was down by 3.38 points to 17.18%.
Meanwhile, the five-year ahead expectation was revised down by 0.44 points to 8.67%.
Although recently released data point to a stronger economic activity than anticipated, recession concerns in developed economies as a result of ongoing geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes continue.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in January parallel to the improved global risk appetite.
The favorable outlook in international commodity prices prevailing in the second half of 2022 continued into December, and price decreases were registered in subgroups excluding industrial metal.
Although crude oil prices assumed an upward trend as of mid-December due to the easing of lockdown measures in China, their January average remains close to the December average.
The fall in natural gas prices observed in December became more evident in January on the back of mild winter conditions.
The deceleration in global demand conditions also triggered a decline in international transportation costs.
The mild course in exchange rates was maintained in December.
Against this background, producer prices decreased by 0.24% in December, led by energy items.
Following the monthly decline in producer prices, annual producer inflation dropped by 38.30 points to 97.72%.
Across main industrial groupings, annual inflation decreased in all subgroups, most notably in energy.
An analysis of monthly price developments by sectors indicates that prices of refined petroleum products as well as electricity and natural gas production declined whereas price increases continued in sectors other than energy.
The level and underlying trend of inflation have been improved with the support of the integrated policy approach implemented to strengthen sustainable price stability and financial stability.
Indicators for the last quarter of the year show that a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand is compensated for by the relatively strong course in domestic demand.
In November, industrial production declined by 1.1%, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, on a monthly basis and it decreased by 1.2% on an annual basis.
However, when sectors typically exhibiting high volatility such as other transport that posted a strong increase in the previous month are excluded, the monthly decline in manufacturing industry production was more limited at 0.9%.
An analysis of production developments with respect to export share suggests that the fall in industrial production in November was stronger in sectors with high export intensity.
On a quarterly basis, the rise in industrial production in the fourth quarter was 1.9% as of November, while it remained limited at 0.5% when typically volatile sectors were excluded.
Manufacturing industry firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that the weak course in export order expectations continued in the last quarter, while domestic market order expectations increased.
In this context, despite the continued weakening in external demand, domestic demand followed a relatively stronger course.
As a matter of fact, while the retail sales volume index increased by 1.5% on a monthly basis in November, the increase on a quarterly basis reached 4.5%.
The uptrend in credit card expenditures also continued in the last quarter.
In November, seasonally-adjusted employment increased by 0.9% on a monthly basis and by 1.6% on a quarterly basis.
The seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate increased by 0.4 points monthly to 54.1%.
In this period, despite the rise in employment, the seasonally- adjusted total unemployment rate remained unchanged compared to the previous month and stayed at 10.2% due to the increase in labor force participation.
Compared to peer economies, job creation has been stronger when the post-pandemic period is examined.
While the current account balance posted a deficit of 3.7 billion dollars in November, the annualized current account deficit increased by 1.6 billion dollars to 45 billion dollars.
The provisional foreign trade data for December suggest that seasonally adjusted exports and imports increased on a monthly basis.
In 2022, exports and imports reached 254.2 billion dollars and 364.4 billion dollars, respectively, while foreign trade deficit realized 110.2 billion dollars, mainly due to the annual increase in gold and energy imports.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, coupled with the acceleration in gold imports, the ongoing upward trend in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
While the share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger-than-expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues throughout the year.
On the other hand, domestic consumption demand, high level of energy prices and the likelihood of a recession in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive.
As announced in the 2023 .
and Liraization Strategy document, the Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism; and the entire policy toolset, particularly funding channels, will be aligned with liraization targets.
The CBRT will implement the Liraization Strategy in order to create an institutional basis for permanent and sustainable price stability.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of Open Market Operations funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5% target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
In January, consumer prices increased by 6.65% while annual inflation decreased by 6.59 points to 57.68%.
Annual inflation rose in the services group against a significant decline in all subgroups, being more pronounced in the energy group.
In this period, the month-on-month rise in energy prices remained moderate, while the highest rise was observed in services.
The course of services prices was affected by developments in food and minimum wage as well as groups affected by the revaluation rate and groups with time-dependent pricing behavior.
Supported by the fall in energy prices, producer prices continued to decrease on an annual basis in January.
Against this background, the annual rate of change in the B index decreased while that in the C index increased.
Prices in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group increased by 6.62% month-on-month, exceeding its historical January average of recent years.
In this group, annual inflation fell by 6.87 points to 71.00%.
Annual inflation fell by 4.45 points to 68.80% in unprocessed food and by 8.44 points to 73.56% in processed food.
In the unprocessed food group, seasonally adjusted data points to a decline in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, more pronounced in the vegetables group.
In January, almost three-quarters of the rise in food prices was mainly driven by price developments in bread-cereals, as well as meat, milk and related products.
In January, energy prices increased by 1.59%, and annual inflation in this group dropped by 39.40 points to 55.03%.
In this period, the rise in municipal water prices continued, while prices of fuels and bottled gas increased due to the rise in the international oil, propane and butane prices.
Meanwhile, there has been a decrease in natural gas prices.
Services prices increased by 12.70% in January, and the group's annual inflation rose by 6.93 points to 62.42%.
Annual inflation decreased in transport services but went up in other subgroups.
The most significant rise in monthly price increases in the services group was registered in the other services subgroup with 16.10%.
This monthly rise in the other services subgroup was driven by maintenance-repair, health, revaluation-related items and recreation-culture services.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, prices were up by 12.73%, and annual inflation reached 75.13%.
In transport services, prices rose by 10.23% driven by administered services whereas annual inflation receded to 77.97%.
Communication services saw a monthly price increase of 8.14% led by mobile phone call charges while annual inflation climbed to 37.42%.
The monthly increase in rents was 9.75% in January, and annual inflation in rents reached 57.07%.
Annual inflation in core goods declined by 4.14 points to 44.82%.
Annual inflation fell across all subgroups, more markedly in other core goods.
Prices of durable goods rose by 4.92% in this period triggered by automobiles, furniture and white goods.
In other core goods, prices increased by 4.01% in January led by the carry-over effect of medicine prices.
Prices in the 1 clothing and footwear subgroup were down by 1.75%, and annual inflation dropped by 1.69 points to 23.32% due to a stronger seasonal effect than the last year’s.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group increased by 11.19% in January, while annual inflation of the group decreased by 14.51 points to 50.60%.
The automatic hike in taxes, which is linked to producer price developments in the second half of 2022, was the main factor driving prices in the group upwards.
According to the February results of the Survey of Market Participants, inflation expectations remained almost flat as the 12-month ahead inflation expectation edged up by 0.31 points to 30.75%, and the 24-month ahead inflation expectation rose by 0.93 points to 18.11%.
Additionally, financial markets have been adjusting their expectations that the central banks would end the rate hike cycles in the near term on the back of the recession risks.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in February parallel to the improved global risk appetite.
In January, international commodity prices recorded a limited increase while energy prices remained relatively flat across subcategories, and non-energy commodity prices edged up.
On the back of the grain corridor, agricultural commodity prices remained moderate.
A notable decline was seen in natural gas prices in January and February amid mild weather conditions and the significant build-up of gas stocks.
International transportation costs fell further in January, while the recent stable course of exchange rates was maintained.
Thus, annual producer inflation continued to decline.
While level and underlying trend of inflation have been improved with the support of the implemented integrated policy approach, the effect of earthquake driven supply-demand imbalances on inflation is closely monitored.
Indicators for the last quarter of 2022 show that a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand is compensated for by the relatively strong course in domestic demand.
In December, industrial production rose by 1.6%, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, on a monthly basis but it decreased by 1.2% on an annual basis.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased by 2% in the fourth quarter.
Meanwhile, retail sales volume index rose by 4.8% and 7.2% on a monthly and quarterly basis, respectively in December.
Before the earthquakes, leading indicators were pointing to a stronger domestic demand compared to foreign demand as well as an increase in the growth trend in the first quarter of 2 2023.
Manufacturing industry firms’ registered external and domestic orders increased on a quarterly basis, with a stronger uptick in domestic market orders.
The upward trend in card expenditures also continued in the first quarter.
Accordingly, indicators, which mostly reflect pre-earthquake data, suggest that domestic demand remained stronger compared to external demand in the first quarter.
After the earthquake, uncertainty loomed over the indicators related to economic activity.
In addition to direct effects, the earthquake will have indirect effects through reconstruction activities and supportive policies, which will cause various sectoral and regional repercussions changing over time.
The impact of the earthquake on production, consumption, employment and expectations is being extensively evaluated.
The short-run effects of the earthquake seem to have been partly reflected on production and order expectations of manufacturing industry firms in February.
Real sector and sectoral confidence indices also declined on a monthly basis in February.
High-frequency foreign trade data for February, on the other hand, suggest that exports from the earthquake-hit zone have shown a recovery trend after the post-disaster decline.
Participation in production is expected to gradually pick up in the upcoming weeks on the back of intensive measures taken for employees.
In the meantime, detailed information obtained from field interviews indicate that the industrial production infrastructure in the affected region has been largely maintained and production has been sustained.
While the earthquake is expected to affect economic activity in the near term, it is anticipated that it will not have a permanent impact on performance of the Turkish economy in the medium term.
In December 2022, seasonally adjusted employment remained almost flat compared to the previous month, while increasing by 1.8% on a quarterly basis.
The seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate increased by 0.1 points monthly to 54.1%, yet the unemployment rate went up by 0.1 points month-on-month to 10.3%.
In the last quarter of 2022, employment posted quarterly growth across all sectors.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the acceleration in gold imports, the ongoing upward trend in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues throughout the year.
On the other hand, domestic consumption demand, high level of energy prices and the weak economic activity in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive.
The Committee will prioritize the creation of supportive financial conditions in order to minimize the effects of the disaster and support the necessary recovery.
Accordingly, in addition to the existing supportive measures, the Committee considered the issue of making 3 a revision in the tools that support the liquidity conditions, if necessary, as stated in the .
and Liraization Strategy for 2023.
After the earthquake, it has become even more important to keep financial conditions supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to reduce the policy rate by 50 basis points.
The Committee assessed that the current monetary policy stance after the measured reduction is adequate to support the necessary recovery in the aftermath of the earthquake by maintaining price stability and financial stability.
The effects of the earthquake in the first half of 2023 will be closely monitored.
The CBRT will implement Liraization Strategy in order to create an institutional basis for permanent and sustainable price stability.
and Liraization Strategy document, the Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism and the entire policy toolset, particularly funding channels, will be aligned with liraization targets.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of Open Market Operations funding, to reduce the weight of swaps in the composition of funding, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
In February, consumer prices increased by 3.15%, while annual inflation decreased by 2.50 points to 55.18%.
The annual inflation decreased across all groups, being more pronounced in the energy group.
On a monthly basis, the rise in food and services groups stood out with price increases.
Supported by the significant fall in energy prices, producer prices remained limited and the decline in annual producer inflation continued in February.
Against this background, seasonally adjusted data point that the monthly increase in B and C indices slowed down significantly compared to January, while annual inflation decreased in both indices.
In February, prices in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group increased by 7.36%, while annual inflation in this group fell by 1.67 points to 69.33%.
Annual inflation fell by 2.67 points to 66.13% in unprocessed food and increased by 0.31 points to 73.87% in processed food.
Seasonally adjusted data point that prices of fresh fruits and vegetables increased in February, more visibly in the vegetables group.
Besides fresh fruits and vegetables prices, the red meat prices stood out with price increases, while prices of processed food items related to these products displayed a similar course.
On the other hand, as the fixed price campaigns in the retail sector ended, prices of milk and dairy products increased.
In February, energy prices rose by 0.64%, and annual inflation in this group dropped by 5.02 points to 50.01%.
The stable course of exchange rates and the favorable outlook in international energy prices led to moderate price movements in this group.
Due to developments in international propane and butane prices, bottled gas prices diverged from the general trend.
Prices in the services group increased by 3.14% while the group's annual inflation decreased by 0.78 points to 61.64%.
While annual inflation rose to a limited extent in the rents subgroup, it remained flat in communication and other services, and declined in transport and restaurants-hotels subgroups.
As effects arising from time-dependent price adjustments and the minimum wage adjustment faded, the rise in services group prices weakened in February.
Due to the moderate course of fuel prices as well as the fall in passenger transport by air tariffs, the monthly rise in the prices of transport services remained limited, and annual inflation in the subgroup decreased by 7.70 points to 70.27%.
The monthly increase in the rents subgroup significantly decelerated compared to January and remained at 2.66%.
Prices in the other services subgroup increased by 3.64%, while maintenance and repair of personal transport equipment and education services prices were remarkable.
Meanwhile, in the restaurants-hotels subgroup, prices were up by 4.07% while annual inflation in the subgroup displayed a limited fall and came down to 74.34%.
Annual inflation in core goods declined by 3.76 points to 41.06% in February.
In February, prices of durable 1 goods (excluding gold) rose by 2.49%, driven by automobiles and furniture, while prices of white goods remained flat as opposed to previous months.
Against this background, annual inflation in the durable goods subgroup decreased by 1.09 points to 44.93%.
In other core goods, prices were up by 1.14% in February, showing a significant slowdown compared to previous months, and annual inflation in this subgroup dropped by 8.38 points to 48.48%.
Prices in the clothing and footwear subgroup were down by 1.89% on the back of the ongoing seasonal discounts, pulling annual inflation down by 2.61 points to 20.71%.
According to the March results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month ahead inflation expectation edged up by 0.88 points to 31.63%, while the 24-month ahead inflation expectation declined by 0.20 points to 17.91%.
The five-year ahead inflation expectation, on the other hand, was measured as 9.00%.
Although recently released data point to a stronger economic activity than anticipated, recession concerns in developed economies as a result of geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes continue, and conditions threatening financial stability have emerged.
While the divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continue due to their diverse economic outlook, coordinated steps are taken that prioritize financial stability through swap agreements and new liquidity facilities.
Financial markets have been adjusting their expectations that the central banks would end the rate hike cycles in the near term.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw outflows in March parallel to the decline in the global risk appetite.
In the meantime, the volatility in the long-term bond yields in advanced economies and the course of global financial conditions keep the risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies alive.
International commodity prices went down in February, driven by energy and industrial metal sub-indices, whereas the agriculture sub-index posted a limited increase.
The fall in international natural gas prices continued in March amid mild weather conditions and the significant build-up of gas stocks.
Accordingly, industrial natural gas tariffs were revised down further in March.
International transportation costs remained on a downward trend in February, while the recent stable course of exchange rates was maintained.
Against this background, the rise in producer prices decelerated compared to January, and the downward trend in annual producer inflation continued.
While level and underlying trend of inflation have been improved with the support of the implemented integrated policy approach, the effect of earthquake-driven supply-demand imbalances on inflation is closely monitored.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data for the last quarter of 2022 indicate a quarterly recovery in economic activity despite a slight decline in the growth rate in annual terms compared to the third quarter.
GDP rose by 3.5% on an annual basis in this period, while it increased quarter-on-quarter by 0.9% in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms.
Thus, the overall growth in 2022 stood at 5.6%.
Throughout the year, the share of net exports and investments in GDP remained above historical averages.
Machinery-equipment investments, one of the sub-items of investments, maintained their upward trend in annual terms for the thirteenth 2 consecutive quarter.
While the largest contribution to growth came from domestic demand in the last quarter of 2022, the impact of weak foreign demand was mirrored in the industrial sector’s contribution to growth.
Before the disaster of the century, leading indicators have been pointing to a stronger domestic demand compared to foreign demand as well as an increase in the growth trend in the first quarter of 2023.
In January, industrial production rose by 1.9% in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms on a monthly basis and by 7% on an annual basis.
Thus, industrial production increased by 2.6% quarterly as of January.
Meanwhile, the retail sales volume index increased by 5.4% on a monthly basis in January.
The quarterly flat course in registered export orders of manufacturing firms as well as the increase in registered domestic orders confirm that domestic demand was stronger compared to foreign demand.
High-frequency foreign trade data for March, on the other hand, suggest that exports from the earthquake- hit zone have shown a recovery trend following the post-disaster decline.
Likewise, high- frequency labor market data imply that job posts and applications across the country recovered in the following weeks despite a limited loss of momentum in the aftermath of the earthquake.
Card expenditures, on the other hand, are slightly below the pre-earthquake trend in the disaster zone.
In January 2023, seasonally adjusted employment increased by 0.8% (264 thousand people) compared to the previous month, while it rose by 1.2% (377 thousand people) on a quarterly basis.
The seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate remained unchanged compared to previous month and stood at 54.1%, while the unemployment rate fell by 0.6 points to 9.7% on a monthly basis.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment has been maintained, albeit a slight deceleration after the earthquake.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth remains high, the stronger-than-expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues throughout the year.
Accordingly, in addition to the existing supportive measures, the Committee considered the issue of making a revision in the tools that support the liquidity conditions, if necessary, as stated in the .
It has become even more important to keep financial conditions supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment after the earthquake.
The Committee assessed that the current monetary policy stance is adequate to support the necessary recovery in the aftermath of the earthquake by maintaining price stability and financial stability.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
In March, consumer prices increased by 2.29%, while annual inflation decreased by 4.67 points to 50.51%.
Annual inflation decreased across all groups, being more pronounced in the energy group.
On a monthly basis, the food and services groups stood out with price increases.
Supported by the significant fall in energy prices, the rise in producer prices remained limited and the decline in annual producer inflation was sustained in March.
Against this background, seasonally adjusted B and C core indicators have recorded the lowest monthly increase since October 2021, while annual inflation receded in both indicators.
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group increased by 3.84% in March, while annual inflation in this group fell by 1.44 points to 67.89%.
Annual inflation dropped by 0.19 points to 65.94% in unprocessed food and by 2.19 points to 71.68% in processed food.
Seasonally adjusted data point that prices of fresh fruits and vegetables decreased in March, more visibly in vegetables.
Price developments excluding fresh fruits and vegetables reveal that red meat and white meat as well as related processed food items diverged with price increases.
On the other hand, non-alcoholic beverages and fruit juices, sugar and related products as well as eggs were other items that stood out.
Meanwhile, price increases continued in the bread and cereals group in March.
Energy prices rose by 0.38% on a monthly basis, while annual inflation in this group dropped by 14.35 points to 35.66%.
Receding international energy prices coupled with the stable course of exchange rates led to moderate price movements across the group in March.
Municipal water tariffs diverged from the group’s outlook with a price increase (1.97%).
The mild course in the group’s prices is projected to continue due to the reduction in residential electricity tariffs in April and the expected fall in residential natural gas bills in the period ahead.
Prices in the services group increased by 3.08% while the group's annual inflation decreased by 1.71 points to 59.93%.
In this period, annual inflation declined in restaurants-hotels, communication, other services, and particularly in transport, while it recorded an increase in rents.
The rent and restaurants-hotels subgroups stood out with monthly price increases.
Prices in transport services edged up by 1.01% amid the positive outlook for fuel prices, while annual inflation in this subgroup declined by 13.15 points to 57.12%.
The outlook for food, particularly red meat prices, brought prices of restaurants-hotels up (3.85%), pulling the subgroup’s annual inflation down by 3.61 points to 70.73%.
Other services prices were up by 2.65% in March, driven by package tours and education services due to higher private school fees.
The monthly increase in the rent subgroup accelerated by 4.89%, and the group's annual inflation reached 62.76%.
Annual inflation in core goods declined by 4.48 points to 36.58%.
Annual inflation fell across subgroups in March.
Prices of durable goods (excluding gold) rose by 1.67% month-on- month, and the subgroup’s annual inflation dropped by 4.72 points to 40.21%.
In durable goods, the furniture item stood out with price increases, while prices of white goods and automobiles rose relatively moderately.
In other core goods, prices edged up by 2.52%, while annual inflation fell by 4.00 points to 44.48%.
In this period, following the regulation in legal profitability scales at mid-month, medicine prices increased by 5.38%, led by low-priced products.
The effects of this increase in medicine prices are expected to carry over into April.
Household cleaning products were another item that came to the forefront in the subgroup with price increases in March.
Prices in the clothing and footwear subgroup went down by 2.02% due to the ongoing seasonal discounts unlike previous years.
Accordingly, annual inflation in this subgroup dropped by 4.45 points to 16.26%.
According to the April results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month ahead inflation expectation decreased by 0.61 points to 31.02%.
The 24-month ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 0.37 points to 17.54%.
The five-year ahead inflation expectation, on the other hand, was measured as 9.03%.
Although recently released data point to a stronger economic activity than anticipated, recession concerns in developed economies as a result of geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes continue, and conditions threatening financial stability, triggered by successive bank failures, have emerged.
While the divergence in monetary policy steps and communications of central banks in advanced economies continues due to their diverse economic outlook, coordinated steps are taken that prioritize financial stability through swap agreements and new liquidity facilities.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in April parallel to the improvement in the global risk appetite.
In March, international commodity prices posted a decline that spread across subgroups.
Global food prices continued to decrease led by cereals and vegetable oils.
After having dropped in March, crude oil prices increased in early April following the OPEC’s quota cut decision, but prices returned to their pre-decision levels by the end of the month.
The downward trend in international natural gas prices continued in April, albeit at a slower pace.
Accordingly, domestic industrial natural gas tariffs were reduced further in April.
While the indicator regarding the pressures on the global supply chain hovered below its historical trend, domestic problems faced after the earthquake were largely eliminated by March.
The favorable outlook of international transportation costs was maintained in March.
Against this background, producer prices increased slightly by 0.44%, led by the energy group, and the downward trend in annual producer inflation continued.
Following the rise in January, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index declined by 6% on a monthly basis in February due to the earthquake.
In the January-February period, industrial production edged down by 0.4% in quarterly terms.
Meanwhile, the seasonally and calendar adjusted retail sales volume index increased by 5.1% on a quarterly basis in the January-February period despite having decreased on a monthly basis in February following the strong rise in January.
Other indicators of consumption demand and the survey data suggest that production and consumption, which dropped due to the disaster-related effects in February, posted a strong recovery trend in March that was driven more by domestic demand than foreign demand.
While the earthquake is expected to affect economic activity in the near term, it is anticipated that it will not have a permanent impact on the performance of the Turkish economy in the medium term.
Leading indicators show that the economic activity in the earthquake zone has been recovering faster than expected.
Credit card expenditures continued to recover towards pre- disaster levels as of end-March in the most severely affected provinces, while they exceeded pre-disaster levels in other provinces in the disaster zone.
Similarly, in seasonally adjusted terms, after a decline in February, exports from the disaster zone in March converged to their pre-disaster level.
An analysis of the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) data by provinces reveals that production and demand expectations also increased in March in provinces with high economic weight in the disaster area.
Detailed information derived from field interviews also confirms that the strong recovery trend in the disaster area continues.
After a rise in January, seasonally adjusted employment declined in February, but increased by 0.8% (260 thousand people) on a quarterly basis in the January-February period.
In February, the unemployment rate rose by 0.3 percentage points to 10% due to the decline in the seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate as well as the decrease in employment.
On a quarterly basis, the labor force participation rate increased by 0.2 points quarter-on- quarter to 53.9% in the January-February period, while the unemployment rate fell by 0.3 points to 9.9%.
The impact of the earthquake on the labor market in the disaster zone will be evaluated more clearly in the coming months.
Along with the flow of data on employment, survey indicators and high-frequency data are also closely monitored.
Data on employment expectations, job vacancies and job applications suggest that despite a limited deceleration in the aftermath of the disaster, the upward trend in employment has been maintained across the country owing to the strong recovery that followed the deceleration.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth remains high, the stronger-than- expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues throughout the year.
Despite the widening foreign trade deficit in consumption goods, the decline in energy imports and the ongoing upward trend in services revenues continue to support the current account balance.
Meanwhile, gold imports have been decelerating over the last few weeks.
Consumer prices rose by 2.39% in April while annual inflation decreased by 6.83 points to 43.68%.
Annual inflation declined across all groups, more visibly in energy and food groups.
On a monthly basis, prices dropped in the energy group but increased in food and services groups.
Supported by the ongoing significant fall in energy prices, the monthly rise in producer prices remained limited and the fall in annual producer inflation continued.
Against this background, in seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases remained on the decline in the B index but edged up in the C index, while annual inflation receded in both indicators.
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group increased by 3.95% in April, while annual inflation in this group fell by 13.97 points to 53.92%.
Annual inflation dropped by 13.24 points to 52.70% in unprocessed food and by 13.93 points to 57.75% in processed food.
Seasonally adjusted data point that prices of fresh fruits and vegetables rose in April, driven by vegetables.
An analysis of unprocessed food price developments excluding fresh fruits and vegetables reveals that the rise in red meat and white meat prices continued.
The monthly price increase in the processed food subgroup continued to decelerate, posting a limited rise of 0.97%.
Excluding processed meat products, price movements were moderate across the group, while the deceleration of the price increase in bread and cereals was noticeable.
Energy prices receded significantly by 3.86% on a monthly basis, while annual inflation in this group dropped by 14.47 points to 21.19%.
This was driven by the favorable course of global price movements.
While residential electricity tariffs decreased by 15% in this period, fuel (- 1.24%) and bottled gas (-4.66%) prices also declined.
Meanwhile, municipal water tariffs continued to diverge from the group’s outlook with a price increase (1.74%).
The fall in energy prices is projected to continue also in May.
Prices in the services group rose by 3.89%, while the group’s annual inflation decreased by 1.31 points to 58.62%.
In this period, annual inflation decreased in the transport and restaurants-hotels subgroups, more visibly in the transport, while it remained flat in other services, and increased in rents and communication.
On a monthly basis, prices in transport services, driven by the rise in intercity passenger transportation by road, rose by 3.08%, while annual inflation in the subgroup decreased by 11.68 points to 45.44%.
Due to the outlook for food prices, particularly for red meat prices, monthly price increases in the restaurants-hotels group remained high (4.24%), and annual inflation in the subgroup decreased by 4.32 points to 66.41%.
The rise in the other services subgroup (2.70%) was mainly driven by package tours, maintenance-repair and education items.
Annual inflation in rents increased to 66.76% following the monthly increase of 4.37%.
In the communication subgroup, prices rose significantly by 8.02%, mainly due to the increases in mobile phone call and internet charges.
Annual inflation in core goods decreased by 2.42 points to 34.16%.
Annual inflation fell across subgroups.
Prices of durable goods (excluding gold) increased by 3.05% month-on-month, while annual inflation in this subgroup fell by 2.74 points to 37.47%.
In April, prices in automobiles and white goods further increased, whereas slowed down in furniture.
Prices in other core goods subgroup rose by 1.09%, while annual inflation in this subgroup decreased by 1.15 points to 43.33%.
Due to the carryover effects of the revision made in the legal profitability scales of the retail sale of pharmaceuticals in mid- March, medicine prices increased by 5.36% becoming the main driver of the monthly price increases in the subgroup.
In the clothing and footwear subgroup, prices increased by 3.80%, while annual inflation fell by 3.49 points to 12.77%.
The change in the methodology, which includes the shift of the month of entry of summer products in the clothing and footwear group into the index from April to May, also has the expected effects on the index in these two months.
According to the May results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month ahead inflation expectation decreased by 1.18 points to 29.84%.
The 24-month ahead inflation expectation and the five-year ahead inflation expectation were measured as 17.74% and 8.22%, respectively.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, equity markets continued to see inflows in May, while bond markets posted outflows.
Having increased until mid-April, international commodity prices resumed their downtrend.
This decline became broad-based across subgroups, with the energy sub-index falling more noticeably.
The retreat in the energy sub-index was not limited to crude oil, but rather spread to products such as propane, butane and natural gas.
Indicators for pressures on the global supply chain continued to hover below their historical trend, while international transportation costs remained mild in April.
Against this background, producer prices increased slightly by 0.81%, and annual producer inflation decreased by 10.34 points to 52.11%.
In addition to international developments, energy consumption supports, natural gas in particular, have been affecting the disinflation process favorably.
The decision to provide household natural gas free of charge for full use in May and for use of 25 cubic meters for the following 11 months is likely to have a stronger-than-expected downward effect on prices 2 in the coming months, due to the significant weight of natural gas in the consumption basket and the country-wide coverage of this support.
In the absence of additional supports, this downward effect will gradually become neutralized within the index in the last quarter of the year, as cold weather and consumption of energy for heating purposes come into effect.
While level and underlying trend of inflation continue to improve with the support of the implemented integrated policy approach, the effect of earthquake-driven supply-demand imbalances on inflation is closely monitored.
Before the disaster of the century, leading indicators were pointing to a stronger domestic demand compared to foreign demand as well as an increase in the growth trend in the first quarter of 2023.
The seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index fell by 5.9% on a monthly basis in February, but showed a significant recovery in March by 5.5%.
Thus, in the first quarter, the industrial production index increased by 0.4% on a quarterly basis despite the impact of the disaster.
Meanwhile, having contracted in February, the seasonally and calendar adjusted retail sales volume index increased by 7.3% on a monthly basis in March, exceeding its pre-disaster level.
Thus, in the first quarter, the index recorded an increase of 6.5% quarter-on-quarter, thereby confirming the strong course of domestic demand.
Other indicators of consumption demand and the survey data suggest that production and consumption, which dropped due to the disaster-related effects in February, have posted a strong recovery trend since March, and that domestic demand has been stronger than foreign demand.
Recent data show that economic activity in the earthquake zone has been recovering faster than expected, and it is becoming evident that the earthquake will not have a permanent impact on performance of the Turkish economy in the medium term.
Credit card expenditures continued to recover towards pre-disaster levels as of mid-May in the most severely affected provinces, while they are above the pre-disaster levels in other provinces in the disaster zone.
Similarly, in seasonally adjusted terms, after a decline in February, exports from the disaster zone as of May are converging further to their pre-disaster level.
Detailed information derived from field interviews also confirms that the strong recovery trend in the disaster area continues and there is no medium-term loss in production capacity on a sectoral basis.
After a decline in February, seasonally adjusted employment remained flat in March.
Thus, employment increased by 195 thousand people in the first quarter and rose by 0.6% on a quarterly basis.
In March, the seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate remained almost unchanged, while the unemployment rate remained intact at 10% due to the limited rise in employment.
On a quarterly basis, the labor force participation rate stood at 53.7% in the first quarter, while the unemployment rate fell by 0.3 points to 9.9%.
Along with the flow of data on employment, survey indicators and high- frequency data are also closely monitored.
While the share of sustainable components of economic growth remains high, the stronger- than-expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues throughout the year.
On the other hand, the ongoing increase in domestic consumption demand, high level of energy prices and the weak economic activity in main trade partners keep the risks on current account balance alive.
The effects of the earthquake in the first half of 2023 are closely monitored.
While global inflation has decreased, it is still above the long-term averages.
In the last ten years, the average inflation was 2.2% in advanced economies and 5.6% in emerging economies.
In 2023, inflation is expected to be 3.3% in advanced economies and 8.1% in emerging economies.
Although the downward trend in commodity prices that started in the middle of last year continues, the current level of the Commodity Price Index is 23.2% above the average of the last ten years.
The index decreased by 29.4% compared to the highest level reached in June last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which declined by 22.0% compared to the peak it reached in April last year, is 14.3% above the average of the last ten years.
This still has an impact on inflation due to the high share of food in the consumer basket.
In 2023, year-end inflation expectations in the USA and the Euro area are 3.0% and 3.8%, respectively; while core inflation expectations are 4.3% and 5.1%, respectively.
High levels of core inflation and inflation expectations imply that global inflation will continue to remain above the targets of central banks for a while.
For this reason, central banks all over the world take measures to reduce inflation.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 123 meetings in the last 16 months, and policy rates were increased in 89 of these meetings.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 182 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 97 of these meetings.
The results of the implemented monetary policy have begun affecting financial conditions, and central banks' emphasis on tightening financing and credit conditions has strengthened.
Despite the flat global growth outlook, relatively strong demand and tight labor markets persist.
The global growth index, which is weighted with export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, has continued its flat course compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
The index is projected to grow by 1.6% in 2023, which is approximately 0.3 points higher than the trough in January.
However, when the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022 is considered, a notable slowdown in foreign demand, on an annual basis, in 2023 is evident.
Global PMI indices indicate that the services sector activity remains robust, while the manufacturing industry continues to follow a flat course just below the threshold value.
As of May, the global services PMI rose by 3.1 points quarter-on-quarter to 55.4 in the second quarter of the year, while the manufacturing PMI increased by 0.1 points to 49.6.
The composite PMI index was 54.4 in May with an increase of 0.2 points compared to the level in April at the global level, remained flat at 53.7 in advanced economies, and rose to 55.6 with an increase of 0.7 points in emerging economies.
While the composite PMI indicator in China was 55.6 with an increase of 2 points compared to April, the index was above the 50-threshold level in both the manufacturing and services sectors in May.
Besides, it was observed that the recovery in services was more pronounced after the relaxation of pandemic measures.
On the other hand, expectations for a slowdown in economic activity in advanced economies due to 1 financial conditions continue.
In the euro area, one of Türkiye's major trading partners, the manufacturing PMI fell to 44.8 in May, the lowest level since the pandemic.
Portfolio flows to emerging markets continued in June on the back of improving risk sentiment.
While there is an inflow of approximately 46.4 billion dollars to equity markets from the beginnig of the year until May, there is an outflow of around 4.3 billion dollars in bond markets.
In June capital flows amounted to 9.2 billion dollars in total of which 8.3 billion dollars were inflows to equity markets.
Although consumer inflation decreased by 45.92 points compared to the peak reached in October 2022, it still maintains its high level.
Consumer prices inched up by 0.04% in May, and annual inflation decreased by 4.09 points from 43.68% to 39.59%.
Recent indicators point to an increase in the underlying trend of inflation.
The strong course of domestic demand, exchange rate developments and the stickiness of services inflation have been the main drivers.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 14.62 points to 15.17 points in the services group (0.55 points of increase); rose from 9.80 points to 10.17 points in the core goods group (0.37 points of increase); dropped from 1.81 points to 1.50 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.31 points of decrease); dropped from 14.22 points to 13.64 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (0.58 points of decrease); dropped from 3.24 points to -0.88 points in the energy group (4.12 points of decrease).
Food prices edged up by 0.71% in May, while annual inflation fell by 1.40 points from 53.92% to 52.52%.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rate of increase in food prices decreased compared to the previous month.
While the rise in red meat prices decelerated in this period, seasonally adjusted data pointed to an increase in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables in May, being more pronounced in vegetables.
Volatilities in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables keep the domestic food prices-driven risks alive.
Processed food prices registered an uptick by 1.08% in monthly terms.
Excluding processed meat products, price movements were moderate across the group, while the deceleration of the price increase in bread and cereals continued in May.
Energy prices fell significantly by 21.00% in May, and annual inflation in this group declined by 28.16 points from 21.19% to -6.97%.
The impact of free natural gas use on the group’s prices was the main driver of this development.
While prices receded across the group on account of the favorable outlook for international energy prices, fuel prices were another item that stood out with a noticeable decline.
Services prices rose by 4.60% in May, pushing the group’s annual inflation up by 1.33 points from 58.62% to 59.95%.
In this period, annual inflation decreased in transport, while it increased in other subgroups.
Restaurants-hotels and rents were the leading subgroups driving the monthly price hike in this group, with their price increases of 7.10% and 5.15%, respectively.
The rise in the prices of the other services subgroup was mainly driven by the maintenance and repair of transport vehicles, which is sensitive to exchange rate developments, as well as items with a strong backward indexation tendency such as education and health services.
Prices of core goods were up by 3.90% in May, and annual inflation increased by 0.91 points from 34.16% to 35.07%.
In May, annual inflation increased in the durable goods and clothing- footwear subgroups, while it decreased in other core goods.
Durable goods prices (excluding gold) increased by 3.48% month-on-month, with automobiles coming to the fore with a price increase of 6.37%.
Automobile prices display a strong uptrend amid the outlook for the 2 Turkish lira and brisk domestic sales.
Prices in the clothing and footwear subgroup rose above historical May averages at 9.96%, which is attributed to the shift in the month of entry into the index from April to May for summer products due to a change in the methodology.
The underlying trend of inflation remains elevated, despite having slowed in the post-2022 period.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in the B and C indices gained pace compared to the previous month, which is also confirmed by alternative core inflation indicators.
The three-month average rates of increase in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.8% and 8.4%, respectively, in February 2022, declined to 2.5% and 2.8% as of May.
As of May, the seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were 2.9% and 3.6%, respectively (2.3% and 2.6% in the previous month).
Alternative core indicators such as median inflation and SATRIM also posted increases compared to the previous month.
Data for the second quarter of the year confirm that economic activity remained robust, particularly driven by domestic demand.
Despite the earthquake-related effects, the retail sales volume index rose by 28.7% year-on-year in the first quarter.
In April, the index maintained its uptrend and increased by 23.7% year-on-year.
The quarterly rate of increase was 3.3% in April.
The uptrend in credit card expenditures continued in the second quarter.
An analysis of manufacturing firms’ registered orders in the second quarter reveals that orders from the domestic market displayed a significant rise at 2.6 points on an annual basis.
Recent data show that economic activity in the earthquake zone continued to recover faster than expected, thereby largely compensating for the disaster-driven contraction.
While employment growth across the country slowed in the first quarter due to the disaster, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 31.6 million in April, considerably close to its pre- disaster level of 31.7 million in January.
The seasonally adjusted labor force participation rate stood at 53.9%, reaching its pre-disaster level.
In April, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 38.1 billion to USD 57.8 billion, from its April 2022 level of USD 19.7 billion, despite the decline in energy imports due to energy prices.
This increase was driven by the rise in foreign trade deficit despite the strong course of the services balance.
As of April, the annualized balance of payments- defined foreign trade deficit increased by USD 54.0 billion year-on-year to USD 100.2 billion.
In the same period, the annualized services surplus increased by USD 14.9 billion to USD 51.6 billion.
Gold imports play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit due to monetary conditions and expectations.
In the first four months of the year, total gold imports increased by USD 9.2 billion year-on-year to USD 11.8 billion.
Provisional foreign trade data for May indicated the continuation of the upward momentum in gold imports.
The strong course of domestic demand has an increasing effect on the current account deficit through imports of consumption goods.
Provisional foreign trade data for May and high- frequency data for June indicate that despite the relatively flat course of exports in seasonally adjusted terms, imports displayed an uptrend due to the above-mentioned groups.
Tourism revenues are expected to make a strong contribution to the current account balance in the second half of the year, thanks to their performance beyond expectations throughout the year.
Travel revenues increased by USD 2.1 billion in the first four months of the year compared to the first four months of the previous year, and reached USD 10.3 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 29.2% year-on-year to 9.5 million in the first four months of the year.
With the increasing contribution of tourism revenues, the current account is projected to follow a more balanced course in the second half of the year.
It is anticipated that the strong course of tourism revenues, considered along with the normalization in energy imports, will contribute to healthy price formation and stability due 3 to supply in the foreign exchange market.
However, increased tourism activity poses a risk to consumer inflation by boosting demand in the short term.
Despite the earthquake-related effects, annual growth of Gross Domestic Product increased to 4%, up from 3.5% in the previous quarter.
In seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms, quarterly growth stood at 0.3%.
Contributions to annual growth were -2.8 points from net exports, 1.2 points from investments, and 5.6 points from the rest of the consumption sector.
Domestic demand made the largest contribution to annual growth, while the weak external demand and the earthquake-driven temporary production loss limited the contribution of the industrial sector to growth.
Annual growth in private consumption was 16.2%, while final domestic demand growth, which includes private and public sector consumption and investment expenditures, was 12.1%.
In this period, machinery-equipment investments grew by 8% on an annual basis, extending their uptrend into the fourteenth quarter.
In April, the seasonally and calendar-adjusted industrial production index decreased by 0.9% month-on-month, but increased by 0.8% quarter-on-quarter, pointing to the continuation of the post-earthquake recovery trend.
Global commodity prices, which started to decrease as of the second half of 2022, supported the fall in consumer inflation via the input prices channel.
Meanwhile, the pressure on producer prices increases due to higher exchange rates and labor costs.
The domestic producer prices index posted a mild increase by 0.65% in May due to the decrease in the energy production group, and annual producer inflation declined by 11.35 points from 52.11% to 40.76%.
After a widespread decline in May, international commodity prices follow an almost flat course in June.
Indicators for pressures in the global supply chain and international transportation costs remain low.
With the decline in global commodity prices, current global supply conditions continue to be favorable for inflation.
Meanwhile, exchange rate developments are expected to exert pressure on energy and other imported input prices in the upcoming period.
The decision to provide household natural gas free of charge for full use in May and for use of 25 cubic meters for the following 11 months led to a significant slowdown in the rate of increase in consumer prices in May, decreasing inflation by 2.4 points.
In the absence of additional supports, this downward effect will reverse into an upward effect on inflation in the last quarter of the year, as cold weather and consumption of energy for heating purposes come into effect.
Despite the favorable course of energy prices, the outlook for sub-indices for capital goods, durable and non-durable consumption goods diverged from headline producer prices.
In addition to this outlook, the depreciation in the Turkish lira, the increasing volatility in exchange rates, and the widespread rise in wages are projected to exert additional cost pressures on inflation in the short run.
The pass-through from these factors to consumer prices is rapid particularly amid strong demand conditions.
According to leading indicators, the exchange rate-led increases in many items in the inflation basket, durable consumption goods in particular, have started to be reflected on consumer inflation.
Price increases in the services sector remain high, and inflation in this group is stickier than in goods.
The monthly price increases in the services sector, where the impact of domestic demand is stronger, remain higher than 2022.
The last three month average of the seasonally adjusted consumer price increases was 2.5% in the B index and 3.7% in services.
In addition, 4 the diffusion index for the services sector hovers above its historical average, indicating that the increases spread across the sector.
In addition to soaring house prices and the backward-indexation behavior, imbalances between supply and demand in the real estate market affect consumer inflation negatively by pushing rent increases upwards.
In the restaurants and hotels subgroup, which is significantly affected by developments in food, wages and tourism, monthly price increases display a steady outlook.
A backward-looking pricing behavior prevails in certain services items led by rents, education, health, recreation and culture, which causes inflationary effects to spread over a long period of time.
Inflation is projected to increase somewhat in 2023, and then decline as the cumulative effects of monetary tightening kick in, gradually converging first to historical averages and then to the medium-term target.
Credit expansion, cost pressures and exchange rate developments indicate that pressures on inflation might increase.
The current course of inflation expectations and the deterioration in pricing behavior keep the upside risks to the inflation outlook alive.
According to the June results of the Survey of Market Participants: The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 0.81 points from 29.84% to 30.65%; the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation went up by 0.38 points from 17.74% to 18.12%; the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised downwards by 0.15 points from 8.22% to 8.07%.
Along with the monetary policy decision, the Committee made assessments regarding loan growth and lending and deposit rates.
From the perspective of financial stability, sensitivity analyses were conducted and it was evaluated that banks are resilient under potential policy rate hike scenarios considered and that these potential scenarios do not threaten the safety and soundness of the banking system.
Credit growth poses a risk to inflation by increasing domestic demand.
As of 16 June 2023, the retail loan balance increased by 65.7% in credit cards, 63.1% in vehicle loans, 27% in personal loans, 21.3% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 38.1% in total.
Meanwhile, since the last MPC meeting period, loan growth has declined.
In this development, the expansion of the scope of the loan growth-based securities maintenance practice and the increase in deposit rates due to the existing regulations have been effective.
The difference between loan and deposit rates and policy rates widened in the previous MPC period.
As of 16 June 2023, average personal loan (excluding overdraft accounts) rates in the sector have risen by 749 basis points to 41.7% compared to the period before the regulation.
Turkish lira commercial loan rates have remained flat at 14.7%.
The Turkish lira deposit rate has increased by 674 basis points to 30.3% since the previous MPC meeting period.
The upward impact of the removal of the interest rate cap on FX-Protected Deposit accounts continues.
Accordingly, the Committee evaluated the necessity of increasing the functionality of market mechanisms through the simplification process of the current micro and macro-prudential framework along with monetary tightening.
The Committee will determine the policy rate in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
Considering the inflation outlook and the upside risks, the Committee assessed that the current monetary policy was far from achieving the inflation target of 5%.
The Committee underlined that deterioration in price stability was threatening macroeconomic stability and, in particular, financial stability.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to implement a monetary tightening process, the steps of which will be strengthened as much as needed in a timely and gradual manner.
The monetary tightening process will continue until a significant improvement in the inflation outlook is achieved.
The policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) has been increased from 8.5% to 15%.
The Committee sees this decision as the first step of the monetary tightening process that was initiated to establish the disinflation course as soon as possible, to anchor inflation expectations, and to control the deterioration in pricing behavior.
The Committee has evaluated analyses on the impact of the monetary tightening process on macroeconomic and financial conditions.
The impact of rate hike scenarios on key macroeconomic variables such as inflation, credit growth, credit and market rates, economic activity and expectations as well as on stress tests on banks have been evaluated.
The inflation outlook necessitates taking new steps to achieve the goals.
Indicators of inflation and the underlying inflation trend will be closely monitored and the CBRT will continue to decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The Committee concluded that inflation, which has drifted away from the target, calls for the effective use of the monetary policy.
The monetary tightening process will increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
In addition, the Committee evaluated that the current micro and macro-prudential framework fell short of supporting the macro-financial stability and distorts the functionality of market mechanisms.
Therefore, a simplification policy has been adopted.
The existing micro- and macro-prudential framework will be simplified to increase the functionality of market mechanisms and strengthen macro-financial stability.
For a smooth transition period, it was decided to implement a gradual simplification policy.
The pace and sequence of transition in the simplification process will depend on impact analysis.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations will be conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities and financial stability.
In addition, in order to be able to sustain price stability in the long-term, the CBRT will continue to support strategic investments that will improve the current account balance.
The Committee will continue to take its decisions in a predictable, data-driven and transparent framework.
While global inflation has been declining, it remains above the long-term averages and targets of central banks.
Consumer inflation in advanced and emerging economies decreased from 5.59% and 5.82% in the previous MPC meeting period to 4.91% and 5.41%, respectively.
Inflation continues to hover significantly above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies.
The average annual inflation expectation for the last quarter of 2023 for advanced and emerging economies are 3.1% and 5.9%, respectively.
Although the downward trend in commodity prices that started in the middle of last year continues, the current level of the Commodity Price Index is 26.2% above the average of the last ten years.
The index decreased by 28.7% compared to the highest level reached last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which declined by 11.2% compared to the peak it reached last year, is 16.2% above the average of the last ten years.
Compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation posted a limited decline from 5.12% to 5.02% in advanced economies and from 6.20% to 6.03% in emerging economies.
The average annual inflation expectation for the last quarter of 2023 is 3.2% in the USA and 3.0% in the euro area, while core inflation expectations are 3.7% and 4.0%, respectively.
As a result, many central banks continue the monetary tightening process.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 130 meetings in the last 17 months, and policy rates were increased in 93 of these meetings.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 190 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 97 of these meetings.1 The results of the implemented monetary policy have begun affecting financial conditions, and central banks' emphasis on tightening financing and credit conditions has strengthened.
The global growth index, which is weighted with export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, has posted a very limited increase compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
The index is projected to grow by 1.7% in 2023, which is approximately 0.4 points higher than the trough in January.
Developing Countries: Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, South Africa, Thailand.
The global services PMI rose by 2.6 points quarter-on-quarter to 54.9 in the second quarter of the year, while the manufacturing PMI decreased by 0.2 points to 49.3.
The composite PMI index was 52.7 in June with a decline of 1.7 points compared to the level in May at the global level, dropped by 1.5 points to 52.2 in advanced economies, and decreased by 2 points to 53.6 in emerging economies.
While the composite PMI indicator in China fell by 3.1 points to 52.5 in June compared to May, the index was above the 50- threshold level in both the manufacturing and services sectors.
Expectations for a slowdown in economic activity in advanced economies due to financial conditions continue.
In the euro area, one of Türkiye's major trading partners, the manufacturing PMI fell to 43.4 in June, the lowest level since the pandemic.
While there was an inflow of approximately USD 46.4 billion to equity markets from the beginning of the year until the end of May, there was an outflow of around USD 4.3 billion in bond markets.
From the beginning of June until July 7, the portfolio inflows amounted to USD 7.6 billion in total, USD 4.9 billion of which were inflows to equity markets.
Although annual inflation in Türkiye has decreased by 47.3 points compared to the peak in October 2022, it still remains high.
Consumer prices rose by 3.92% in June, while annual inflation fell by 1.38 points to 38.21%.
Recent indicators point to continuation of the increase in the underlying trend of inflation.
The strong course of domestic demand, cost pressures stemming from wages and exchange rates, the stickiness of services inflation and tax adjustments have been the main drivers.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 10.17 points to 10.49 points in the core goods group (0.32 points of increase) and from 1.50 points to 1.81 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.31 points of increase) but dropped from 13.64 points to 13.56 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (0.08 points of decrease), from 15.17 points to 15.00 points in the services group (0.17 points of decrease) and from -0.88 points to -2.64 points in the energy group (1.76 points of decrease).
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 3.02% in June, and annual inflation rose by 1.40 points to 53.92%.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rate of increase in food prices accelerated compared to the previous month, driven by prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, mainly vegetables.
In the other unprocessed food group, the rise in red meat prices gained pace compared to the previous month.
Processed food prices went up by 1.85% on a monthly basis mainly due to tea prices that were driven up by fresh tea purchase prices.
Monthly inflation of bread and cereals increased somewhat in this period, reaching 1.41%.
Energy prices rose by 4.23% in June, and the group’s annual inflation dropped by 9.55 points to -16.52% due to the base effect.
Fuel prices, which increased (11.32%) in tandem with the outlook of the Turkish lira despite the relatively flat course of international crude oil prices, were the leading driver of the monthly increase in energy prices.
In June, prices of services rose by 3.66%, and the group’s annual inflation edged down by 0.50 points to 59.45%.
Price hikes spread across subgroups, while rents and restaurants-hotels continued to be the subgroups standing out with their price increases of 5.80% and 4.32%, respectively.
Communication prices remained on the rise led by internet fees, while increases in prices of the maintenance and repair of personal transport vehicles as well as recreation 2 and sports services were notable in the other services subgroup.
Meanwhile, the outlook for transport services was mainly shaped by the ongoing price hikes in air passenger transport.
Prices of core goods were up by 4.03% in June, and annual inflation increased by 1.62 points to 36.69%.
In June, annual inflation increased in durable goods (excluding gold) as well as in clothing and footwear, but decreased in other core goods.
The monthly increase in durable goods (excluding gold) grew stronger with 6.64% over the previous month, mainly driven again by automobiles in June.
Automobile prices surged by 10.28% due to brisk domestic sales as well as exchange rate developments.
Thus, the rise in automobile prices amounted to 34.01% in the first six months of 2023.
Meanwhile, prices of white goods posted an increase of 3.78% in June.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group soared by 11.13%, and annual inflation in this group rose by 10.80 points to 40.90%.
This was mainly driven by producer- driven price hikes in tobacco products (12.29%).
The price increase in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group will also continue in July due to the specific SCT rise that is automatically updated based on the D-PPI as well as VAT arrangement at the beginning of the month.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.8% and 8.4%, respectively, in February 2022, declined to 2.8% and 3.3% as of June 2023.
In June, the seasonally adjusted rates of monthly increase in the B and C indices were 3.1% and 3.7%, respectively (2.9% and 3.6% in the previous month).
Leading indicators for July point to a significant monthly price increase through the channels of demand, wages, exchange rates, taxes and deteriorating pricing behavior.
Accordingly, it is estimated that annual inflation will also increase significantly.
In May, the retail sales volume index maintained its uptrend, increasing by 33.1% year-on-year.
The quarterly rate of increase as of May was 4.6%.
The uptrend in card expenditures continued in the second quarter, and seasonally adjusted card expenditures posted a strong increase of 24.3% compared to the first quarter.
Leading indicators and field interviews suggest that the strong course of domestic market orders continued in July.
As of May, seasonally adjusted employment reached 31.7 million, which was 26,000 people above its pre-disaster level in January.
In this period, seasonally adjusted employment increased quarterly by 0.9%, and labor force participation rate by 0.3 points.
Meanwhile, the unemployment rate decreased by 0.5 points in May from its 10% level in the previous month, hitting its lowest level since March 2014.
In May, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 37.3 billion to USD 60 billion, from its May 2022 level of USD 22.6 billion, despite the decline in energy imports due to energy prices.
As of May, the annualized balance of payments-defined 3 foreign trade deficit increased by USD 49.9 billion year-on-year to USD 101.9 billion.
In the same period, the annualized services surplus increased by USD 12.1 billion to USD 51.5 billion.
In the first five months of the year, total gold imports increased by USD 10.7 billion year-on-year to USD 14.6 billion.
Provisional foreign trade data for June suggest that despite hovering below the May level, gold imports remain high.
Provisional foreign trade data for June and high-frequency data for July indicate that imports remained high despite the relatively flat course of exports in seasonally adjusted terms, excluding religious holiday-related working day effects.
Travel revenues increased by USD 2.5 billion in the first five months of the year compared to the first five months of the previous year, and reached USD 14.1 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 26.1% year-on-year to 13.6 million in the first five months of the year.
It is anticipated that the strong course of tourism revenues, considered along with the normalization in energy imports, will contribute to healthy price formation and stability due to supply in the foreign exchange market.
In May, the seasonally and calendar-adjusted industrial production index increased by 1.1% month-on-month.
While monthly increases became widespread across sectors, they were stronger in sectors with high export shares and in those that typically exhibit high volatility.
Industrial production increased by 1.4% quarter-on quarter, pointing to the continuation of the post-earthquake recovery trend.
Similarly, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate increased by 0.9 points quarter-on-quarter to 76.2% in the second quarter, and compensated for the earthquake-induced loss in capacity utilization.
Global commodity prices that have been on the decline since the second half of 2022, have supported the fall in consumer inflation through input prices channel.
On the other hand, due to exchange rates and rising labor costs, pressure on producer prices has been increasing.
The monthly increase of domestic producer prices at 6.50% was significantly stronger compared to recent months, while annual producer inflation decreased by 0.34 points to 40.42% due to the base effect.
In June, international commodity prices declined slightly (- 0.76%), while exchange rate developments were the main driver of the rise in producer prices.
Price increases were broad-based across subgroups, with energy production posting the most notable rise (12.67%).
Thus, the outlook for energy costs, which had been supporting the inflation outlook for a long time, reversed in this month.
In this period, other subgroups that stood out with high monthly price increases were capital goods (8.02%) and intermediate goods (6.59%).
In July, indicators for global supply chain pressures and international transportation costs remained low.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained about one standard deviation below its historical average in June.
Global commodity prices did not display a noticeable change in July.
In sum, current global supply conditions remain favorable for inflation.
Adjustment in the minimum wage in July 2023, accompanied by wage adjustments for civil servants and public sector workers, and wage hikes becoming broad-based are expected to feed upward pressures, particularly cost-driven impacts, on inflation in the second half of the year.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira, widespread wage increases and tax adjustments are expected to place additional cost-side pressure on inflation in the near term.
The pass- through from these factors to consumer prices is particularly rapid in times of strong demand conditions.
In fact, leading indicators suggest that cost developments led to widespread price hikes in July.
Price increases in the services sector remain high, and inflation in this group displays inertia compared to goods.
Monthly price increases in the services sector, where the domestic demand effect is more obvious, are still high compared to 2022.
The average of seasonally- adjusted consumer price increases in the last three months is 2.8% in the B index, while it is 3.5% in services.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering above its historical average, indicating that the increases showed a generalized pattern across the sector.
Monthly increases in the restaurants and hotels subgroup, which is significantly affected by food, wage and tourism developments, display a persistent outlook.
The sector, which is highly sensitive to minimum wage developments, is expected to maintain its uptrend in the following months.
Certain services items, particularly rents, education, health, recreation and culture, exhibit pricing behavior indexed to past consumer inflation, prompting inflationary effects to spread over a long period of time.
Given the expected outlook for consumer inflation in the near term, there is a risk that inflation will remain high for an extended period in groups in which backward-indexation is prevalent.
Fuel prices are capable of having a significant impact on consumer prices, particularly on transport services, through both production inputs and transportation costs.
The recent significant increase in fuel prices driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax hikes is likely to have a significant impact on transport services prices in the upcoming period.
The Committee anticipates that tax regulations will put further pressure on inflation in the short run.
However, it is assessed that the impact of tax hikes will be temporary and will be offset to some extent by favorable effects on demand and fiscal discipline.
VAT rates were raised by 2 points in July.
Additionally, the VAT rate on some cleaning products was raised to 20% from 8%.
The higher fiscal multiplier due to the VAT increase in tobacco products led to high price increases.
The lump-sum SCT amounts on fuel were increased.
The lump-sum SCT increase of TRY 5 for gasoline and diesel, and TRY 4 for LPG will have a negative impact on consumer inflation both directly and indirectly.
The current course of inflation expectations and the deterioration in pricing behavior keep upside risks to the inflation outlook alive.
The headline inflation diffusion index was about two standard deviations above its historical average in June.
According to the July results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 2.56 points from 30.65% to 33.21%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation rose by 0.92 points from 18.12% to 19.04%, and the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards by 0.79 points from 8.07% to 8.86%.
Consumer inflation is projected to rise somewhat in 2023, and then decline as the cumulative effects of interest rate increases and quantative tightening kick in, gradually converging first to historical averages and then to the medium-term target.
As of 14 July 2023, the retail loan balance increased by 81.1% in credit cards, 68.7% in vehicle loans, 30.6% in personal loans, and 22.1% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 44.6% in total.
Meanwhile, since the last MPC meeting period, personal loan growth has lost further momentum, increasing by 2.9% from 16 June.
This was driven by the expansion of the scope of the loan growth-based securities maintenance practice.
On the other hand, growth remains robust in credit cards with an annual growth rate rising from 175.4% to 186.6%.
TL commercial loans remained relatively flat with a decline in annual growth rates from 73.8% to 69.1%.
Average personal loan rates (excluding ODA), which increased by 749 basis points to 41.7% in the previous MPC meeting period compared to the pre-regulation times, rose by 644 basis points to 48.1% in the last MPC meeting period.
Housing and vehicle loan rates increased from 21.8% and 34% to 32.6% and 41.3%, respectively in the same period.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased by 1,054 basis points to 25.2% due to the policy rate hike.
TL deposit rates, which rose to 32.9% on June 23, declined despite the 650 basis points increase in the policy rate and stood at 27.8% on 14 July.
The spread between the policy rate and TL deposit rates narrowed notably.
This was mainly driven by the regulation on securities maintenance practice, which is the first step of the simplification process in the micro and macroprudential framework.
Foreign direct investment, notable improvement in external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves and improvement in current account balance driven by rising tourism revenues will contribute significantly to price stability.
With the recently-signed agreements, foreign direct investments that will focus on improving technology investments and production capacity will support external financing in the upcoming period.
Türkiye's 5-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on 22 May 2023 amid domestic uncertainties, declined to 493 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period and to 457 basis points on 19 July 2023.
Similarly, 1-month and 12-month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira, which were 25.2 and 33.8 points in the previous MPC meeting period declined to 23.6 and 30.3 points, respectively.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 1.42 billion since June, USD 0.09 billion of which went to the GDDS market and USD 1.33 billion to the equity market.
International reserves of the CBRT have assumed a strong upward trend since June.
Having declined from USD 128.8 billion at the end of 2022 to USD 98.5 billion at the end of May, gross international reserves of the CBRT rose to USD 113.1 billion as of 14 July.
The policy rate will be determined in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
The Committee assessed that the capacity of the monetary policy framework to achieve the 5% inflation target should be enhanced in view of the inflation outlook and upside risks.
The Committee drew attention to the risks that a deterioration in price stability may pose to macroeconomic stability and financial stability, in particular.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to continue the monetary tightening process, the steps of which are strengthened as much as needed in a timely and gradual manner.
The monetary tightening process is envisaged to be further strengthened until a significant improvement in the inflation outlook is achieved.
The Committee decided to continue the monetary tightening process initiated in order to establish the disinflation course as soon as possible, to anchor inflation expectations, and to control the deterioration in pricing behavior.
In this context, the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) was increased from 15% to 17.5%.
It is assessed that the inflation outlook necessitates a sustained monetary tightening.
The Committee reviewed analyses on the effects of monetary tightening on macroeconomic and financial conditions.
The effects of rate hike scenarios on key macroeconomic variables such as inflation, loan growth, loan and market rates, economic activity and expectations were assessed from a holistic perspective.
In addition, the Committee reiterated that the current micro- and macroprudential framework should be improved to foster macrofinancial stability and increase the functionality of market mechanisms.
Accordingly, the simplification policy in this framework has been maintained.
The existing micro- and macroprudential framework will be simplified to increase the functionality of market mechanisms and strengthen macrofinancial stability.
The simplification policy will continue to be gradual.
In the simplification process, the pace and sequence of the steps depend on impact analyses.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted from a holistic perspective for all components of the framework, including its impacts on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities and financial stability.
In this context, in addition to the increase in the policy rate, the Committee has made decisions on quantitative tightening and selective credit tightening to support the monetary policy stance.
While policy rates, the main policy instrument, affect monetary and financial conditions and expectations, these decisions aim to stabilize excess Turkish lira liquidity and consumption demand and increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The categories of personal credits, credit cards and vehicle loans have been increasing by 9.8% and 9.1% on a monthly average since early 2023.
With this acceleration in retail loans, it is assessed that domestic demand deteriorates price stability both directly and through the current account balance.
Selective credit tightening decisions are projected to support the rebalancing process in domestic demand.
The Turkish lira liquidity inflows to the financial system stemming from the foreign exchange difference payments of FX-protected deposit accounts due to the exchange rate developments are closely monitored.
Due actions will be taken based on the impact analyses in view of the current market conditions and liquidity projections for the upcoming period.
According to the quantitative tightening decision, the CBRT planned to sterilize the excess liquidity in the market by raising the Turkish lira reserve requirement ratios for FX-protected deposit accounts.
Global inflation has recently been declining, yet it remains above the long-term averages and central bank targets.
Consumer inflation in advanced economies decreased from 4.91% to 4.08% over the intermeeting period, whereas consumer inflation in emerging economies increased from 5.41% to 5.84% due to relatively large economies such as Russia, Türkiye and India.
In the last ten years, inflation averaged 2.2% in advanced economies and 5.6% in emerging economies.
The average annual inflation expectation for the last quarter of 2023 for advanced and emerging economies are 3.1% and 6.2%, respectively.
Compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation declined from 5.02% to 4.74% in advanced economies, while it remained flat at 6.03% in emerging economies.
The average annual inflation expectation for the last quarter of 2023 is 3.1% in the USA and 3.0% in the euro area, while core inflation expectations are 3.6% and 4.1%, respectively.
Commodity prices have recently been rising due to energy commodity prices led by oil prices.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 30.6% above the average of the last ten years.
The index fell 26.2% compared to the highest level reached last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which declined by 10.9% compared to the peak it reached last year, is 16.6% above the average of the last ten years.
As a result, many central banks around the world continue the monetary tightening process.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 138 meetings in the last 18 months, and policy rates were increased in 97 of these meetings.
On the other hand, the central banks of Brazil and Chile, which initiated their rate hike cycles with early and strong steps and implemented them decisively in a period when inflation started to rise, began to cut rates on the back of the decline in consumer inflation.
However, 1 Advanced Countries: Australia, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Euro Area, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States of America.
Emerging Countries: Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, South Africa, Thailand.
Despite the flat global growth outlook, relatively strong demand and tight labor markets continue.
The index is projected to grow by 1.8% in 2023, which is approximately 0.5 points higher than the trough in January.
Having fallen in June, global PMI declined further in July.
In July, the global manufacturing industry PMI remained unchanged at 48.7 over the previous month, while the global services PMI decreased by 1.2 points to 52.7.
Thus, the global composite PMI index was down by 1 point to 51.7 in July compared to the previous month.
In July, the composite PMI data of both advanced and emerging economies receded.
The composite PMI indicator for China remained on the decline in July, falling by 0.7 points to 51.9.
The manufacturing PMI dropped by 1.3 points to 49.2, below its threshold value, while the services PMI was relatively flat at 54.1.
In the euro area, one of Türkiye's major trading partners, the composite PMI indicator declined further in August, falling by 1.6 points to 47.
In August, the manufacturing PMI was up by 1 point to 43.7, only to reach one of the lowest levels since June 2020 when the first wave of the pandemic was experienced.
The services PMI, in particular, remained on the decline in August and fell by 2.6 points to 48.3, below its threshold.
While there was an inflow of approximately USD 54.2 billion to equity markets in the first half of 2023, there was an outflow of around USD 2.4 billion from bond markets.
From the beginning of July until 11 August, the portfolio inflows amounted to USD 3 billion in total, USD 1.3 billion of which were inflows to equity markets.
Although annual inflation in Türkiye has decreased by 37.7 points compared to the peak in October 2022, it started to rise again.
Consumer prices rose by 9.49% in July, and annual inflation increased by 9.62 points to 47.83%.
Recent indicators point to a continued increase in the underlying trend of inflation.
The strong course of domestic demand, cost pressures stemming from wages and exchange rates, stickiness of services inflation and tax regulations have been the main drivers of this development.
The increase fuel inflation due to exchange rates and international developments also had an additional effect on the increase in inflation through direct and indirect channels and contributed to its widespread diffusion.
In fact, leading indicators suggest that widespread price hikes occurred also in August following the large increases in July.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 15.00 points to 17.85 points in the services group (2.86 points of increase), from 10.49 points to 12.95 points in the core goods group (2.46 points of increase), from -2.64 points to -0.39 points in the energy group (2.25 points of increase), from 13.56 points to 15.27 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (1.71 points of increase), and from 1.81 points to 2.15 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.34 points of increase).
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages group increased by 7.71% in July, and annual inflation rose by 6.80 points to 60.72%.
Price increases were widespread across the food group.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rate of increase in food prices accelerated compared to the previous month, which was again driven by prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
In the 2 other unprocessed food group, red meat, nuts and potatoes were noteworthy.
Processed food prices went up by 6.08% on a monthly basis.
While this was mainly driven by bread and cereals, tea prices continued to rise due to fresh tea purchase prices.
Having dropped in recent months, prices of milk and dairy products started to rise again in this period.
Energy prices rose by 12.73% in July, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 13.66 points to -2.86%.
Monthly energy inflation was driven by the fuel item, which posted a price hike of 29.04%.
Coupled with international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments, the SCT adjustment brought about a significant increase in fuel prices.
While fuel prices had surged by 57.35% from early May to the previous MPC meeting, they recorded an additional increase of 14.34% from that period to 23 August.
In addition to its direct effect, the increase in fuel prices also has an indirect negative effect on consumer inflation through transportation costs.
Services prices rose by 9.81% in July, and the group’s annual inflation surged by 10.20 points to 69.65%.
Strong price hikes spread across the group, and annual inflation increased in all subgroups.
In July, the minimum wage adjustment and the ongoing negative outlook for food prices as well as strong tourism demand led to an 11.92% rise in restaurants-hotels.
Due to the minimum wage hike and exchange rate developments, prices in the other services subgroup were up by 10.27%.
In other services, the maintenance and repair of personal transport vehicles and health services came to the forefront.
Significant increases in fuel prices adversely affected transport services, pushing subgroup prices up by 10.03%.
The monthly price increase in the rents subgroup strengthened somewhat in July and was measured at 7.67%.
The price increase in communication services was more limited compared to other subgroups with 3.74%.
Prices of core goods were up by 9.40% in July, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 7.56 points to 44.25%.
In July, annual inflation increased across all subgroups, most notably in durable goods.
Following the depreciation of the Turkish lira, tax and wage increases as well as buoyant demand conditions, the monthly price increase in durable goods (excluding gold) grew stronger with 12.49% over the previous month, led again by automobiles in July.
A similar trend was also observed in other core goods, and the subgroup prices rose by 8.73% due to widespread increases.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group soared by 11.17%, and annual inflation in this group rose by 5.68 points to 46.58%.
This was mainly driven by tax adjustments.
The VAT increase as well as the reflection of the producer price increase in the first half of the year on specific and minimum specific taxes pushed prices upwards across the group.
The underlying trend of inflation increased markedly in July.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in the B and C indices rose significantly compared to the previous month, which is also confirmed by alternative core inflation indicators.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.8% and 8.4%, respectively, in February 2022, stood at 5.1% and 5.7% as of July 2023.
In July, the seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 9.2% and 9.8%, respectively (3.2% and 3.6% in the previous month).
Leading indicators suggest that the significant monthly price increases coming through the channels of demand, wages, exchange rates, taxes and deteriorating pricing behavior will also continue in August.
In June, the retail sales volume index maintained its uptrend, increasing by 23.2% year-on-year, while the quarterly rate of increase was 5.2%.
The uptrend in card expenditures also continued in July, and seasonally adjusted expenditures by domestic cards posted a strong increase of 12% on a monthly basis.
An analysis of manufacturing firms’ registered orders in July reveals that orders from the domestic market displayed a significant rise at 8.4 points on an annual basis.
Leading indicators suggest that the strong course of domestic market orders is maintained in August.
Interviews with firms, on the other hand, point to slight loss of momentum at the sectoral level due to the high rate of price increases.
In June, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index increased by 1.6% month-on-month, while it rose by 2.3% quarter-on quarter, indicating that the earthquake- driven production losses were compensated for.
Similarly, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate increased by 0.3 points month-on-month to 76.9% in July, the highest level in the last ten months.
Leading indicators for August also suggest that this outlook for the manufacturing industry continues.
As of June, seasonally adjusted employment increased by 0.5% quarter-on-quarter to 31.5 million, exceeding the average quarterly employment level before the disaster.
In this period, the labor force participation rate remained flat at 53.4% while the unemployment rate decreased by 0.3 points to 9.7%, hitting its lowest level since the second quarter of 2014.
High-frequency data indicate that demand remains robust in the labor market.
In June, in line with the improvement in the foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit decreased by USD 3.3 billion monthly to USD 56.5 billion.
This decrease was driven by the strong course of the services balance and the ongoing fall in energy prices over the previous year as well as the notable decline in imports in June.
As of June, the annualized balance of payments-defined foreign trade deficit widened by USD 42.5 billion year-on-year to USD 99.3 billion.
In the same period, the annualized services surplus rose by USD 9.6 billion to USD 51.9 billion.
Gold imports, which have increased due to monetary conditions and expectations, play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit.
According to provisional foreign trade data for July, gold imports increased by USD 12.5 billion year-on-year to USD 19.4 billion in the first seven months of the year.
Effects of the measures taken to reduce the acceleration in gold imports which is critical for the course of the current account deficit in 2023 are closely monitored.
Provisional foreign trade data for July indicate that exports declined in July due to the bringing forward of deliveries ahead of the religious holiday, while imports of all subgroups of goods, led by consumption goods in particular, recorded increases outpacing the declines in June.
On the other hand, high-frequency data for August imply that imports remained relatively flat as against the recovery in exports in seasonally adjusted terms.
Tourism revenues, which have been above expectations throughout the year, continue to contribute positively to the current account balance.
Travel revenues increased by USD 3.3 billion in the first six months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 18.9 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 22.9% year-on-year to 18.8 million in the first half of the year.
While global commodity prices that have been on the decline since the second half of 2022 have supported the fall in consumer inflation through the input prices channel, price increases in the energy subgroup have been notable recently.
These price increases have not been limited to crude oil but have also been observed in propane, butane and coal.
Excluding the energy subgroup, international commodity prices remained flat in July, while the general index rose by 4.41%.
In this period, exchange rates and rising labor costs stood as the main factors exerting pressure on producer prices.
The monthly increase of domestic producer prices at 8.23% was higher compared to the previous month, while annual producer inflation rose by 4.08 points to 44.50%.
In this period, capital goods (11.67%), durable consumption goods (10.37%), and intermediate goods (8.93%) were the subgroups that stood out with high monthly price increases.
In August, indicators for global supply chain pressures have remained mild while international transportation costs have increased.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained about one standard deviation below its historical average in July as well.
While commodity prices excluding energy have declined somewhat in August, increases in the energy subgroup push the general index upwards as in July.
Adjustment in the minimum wage in July 2023, accompanied by wage adjustments for civil servants and public sector workers, and wage hikes becoming broad-based are expected to strengthen the upward pressures, particularly cost-driven impacts, on inflation in the second half of the year.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira, widespread wage increases and tax adjustments are expected to continue to exert cost-side pressure on inflation in the near term.
The pass- through from these factors to consumer prices is particularly strong in times of deteriorating inflation expectations.
Price increases in the services sector, which remained high in the first half of the year, further strengthened as of July.
Monthly price increases in the services sector, which displays inertia compared to goods, are high compared to 2022.
The average of seasonally-adjusted consumer price increases in the last three months is 5.1% in the B index, while it is 5.7% in services.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering significantly above its historical average, indicating that the increases showed a generalized pattern across the sector.
Monthly increases in the restaurants and hotels subgroup, which are significantly affected by food, wage and tourism developments, display a persistent outlook.
Given the recent developments in the minimum wage and food prices, the sector is expected to maintain its upward trend in the following months.
Certain services items, particularly rents, education, health, recreation and culture exhibit pricing behavior indexed to past consumer inflation, prompting inflationary effects to spread over a long period of time.
Given the expected outlook for consumer inflation in the near term, there is a risk that inflation will remain high for an extended period in items in which backward-indexation is prevalent.
The recent significant increase in fuel prices driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax hikes is likely to continue to exert pressure on transport services prices in the upcoming period.
The impact of the VAT rate hike in July on prices is expected to extend into August due to the number of days calculated and in the coming months depending on the frequency of price changes by firms, albeit at a weaker pace.
The lump-sum SCT increase has a negative impact on consumer inflation both directly and indirectly.
As the tax hikes coincided with exchange rate developments and the rise in international crude oil prices, indirect effects, particularly on transportation services and food items, have been realized rapidly.
Recently, while price hikes in administered transportation services have become more frequent, it is assessed that the rise in prices of fresh fruits and vegetables contrary to the seasonal averages was also induced by fuel-driven developments.
Shocks such as tax and administered price increases, minimum wage regulation and exchange rate developments, which are considered temporary during normal inflation periods, may have longer-lasting negative effects on expectations and inflation inertia than expected in a high inflation environment.
In addition to these factors, higher-than-anticipated deterioration in inflation expectations and pricing behavior due to the factors affecting inflation as well as the rise in oil prices in July and beyond keep upside risks to the inflation outlook alive.
The headline inflation diffusion index displayed a more unfavorable outlook in July and was about three standard deviations above its historical average.
According to the August results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 8.80 points from 33.21% to 42.01%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation rose by 3.50 points from 19.04% to 22.54%, and the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards by 1.56 points from 8.86% to 10.42%.
It is anticipated that, at the end of the year, inflation will hover close to the upper bound of the forecast range provided in the Inflation Report (Report) and then, given the monetary tightening stance, disinflation will be established in 2024 in line with the Report.
As of 18 August 2023, the retail loan balance increased by 93.7% in credit cards, 74.6% in vehicle loans, 31.7% in personal loans, and 23.6% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 49.3% in total.
Meanwhile, since the last MPC meeting period, personal loan growth has lost further momentum, increasing by 0.8% from 14 July.
In the same period, although its growth slowed down to 7%, personal credit cards maintained its strong trend, and its annual growth remained flat at 184.2%.
For Turkish Lira denominated commercial loans, which grew by 3% compared to the previous MPC period, annual growth stood at 63.5%.
Average personal loan rates (excluding ODA), which had been trending flat since the previous MPC period, became 47.1% as of 18 August 2023.
In the same period, housing loan rates increased from 32.6% to 36.4% and vehicle loan rates decreased from 41.3% to 38.1%.
As of June, the measures taken to ensure the sound functioning of the banking system within the scope of the simplification process have primarily restored the flow of Turkish lira commercial loans.
Turkish lira commercial loans, which increased by 0.3% across the sector in June, grew 2.4% in July.
Turkish lira deposit rates, which started to decline in this period, stood at 24.9% in the week ending August 18.
Owing to the policy rate hike and the recent steps taken as part of the simplification of the macroprudential framework, it is expected that the demand for Turkish lira instruments will increase, loan rates and deposit rates will rise concurrently and the monetary transmission mechanism will be strengthened.
Foreign direct investments, improvement in external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, and the positive impact of tourism revenues on current account balance will contribute significantly to price stability.
Türkiye's 5-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on 22 May 2023 amid domestic uncertainties, declined to 457 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period and to 412 basis points on 23 August 2023.
Similarly, 1-month and 12-month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira, which were 23.6 and 30.3 points in the previous MPC meeting period declined to 15.2 and 28.5 points, respectively.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 2.23 billion since June, USD 0.48 billion of which went to the GDDS market and USD 1.75 billion to the equity market.
Having declined from USD 128.8 billion at the end of 2022 to USD 98.5 billion at the end of May, gross international reserves of the CBRT rose to USD 117.1 billion as of 18 August 2023. .
The policy rate will be determined in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
The Committee assessed that because of the inflation outlook and the upside risks, the capacity of the monetary policy framework to achieve the 5% inflation target should be enhanced.
The Committee drew attention to the risks that a deterioration in price stability may pose to macroeconomic stability and especially to financial stability.
Monetary tightening will be further strengthened as much as needed in a timely and gradual manner until a significant improvement in the inflation outlook is achieved.
The Committee decided to continue the monetary tightening process in order to establish the disinflation course as soon as possible, to anchor inflation expectations, and to control the deterioration in pricing behavior.
Therefore, the Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 17.5% to 25%.
To increase the functionality of market mechanisms and strengthen macro financial stability, the Committee will continue to simplify and improve the existing micro- and macroprudential framework.
A gradual simplification policy will continue to be implemented, and the pace and sequence of the transition will continue to be determined through impact analyses.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities and financial stability.
In this context, recent regulations targeting a rising share of Turkish lira deposits will strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism.
In addition to the increase in the policy rate, the Committee will continue to make decisions on quantitative tightening and selective credit tightening to support the monetary policy stance.
With the acceleration in retail loans, it is assessed that domestic demand is deteriorating price stability both directly and through the current account balance.
Selective credit tightening decisions are expected to support the rebalancing process in domestic demand.
Indicators of inflation and underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored and the Committee will continue to decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The Committee will continue to make its decisions in a predictable, data-driven and transparent framework.
In August, consumer inflation posted a slight increase in many economies due to energy prices, while core inflation continued to decrease, with some exceptions such as China and Russia.
Committee (MPC) meeting, consumer inflation has increased from 4.08% to 4.27% in advanced economies and from 5.84% to 6.48% in emerging economies.
The average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 for advanced and emerging economies are 3.2% and 6.5%, respectively.
Compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation declined from 4.74% to 4.57% in advanced economies, whereas it rose from 6.03% to 6.57% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 are 3.1% in the USA and 3.3% in the euro area, while core inflation expectations are 3.5% and 4.3%, respectively.
Commodity prices continue to increase recently due to energy commodity prices led by oil prices.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 31.8% above the average of the last ten years.
The index fell by 25.5% compared to the highest level reached last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined by 12.3% compared to the peak it reached last year, is 14.8% above the average of the last ten years.
As a result, many central banks around the world are expected to continue to keep their policy rates at levels that will maintain the tightness of the monetary stance.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 145 meetings in the last 19 months, and policy rates were increased in 100 of these meetings1.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 213 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 101 of these meetings.
On the other hand, following the central banks of Brazil and Chile, which initiated rate cut cycles earlier on the back of the decline in consumer inflation, the central banks of Poland and Peru also reduced their policy rates in September.
However, given the high 1 Advanced Countries: Australia, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Euro Area, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States of America.
The global growth index, which is weighted with export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained flat compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
Having fallen in June and July, global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) declined further in August.
In August, the global manufacturing industry PMI edged up by 0.4 points to 49 points over the previous month, while the global services PMI decreased by 1.6 points to 51.1.
Thus, the global composite PMI index was down by 1 point to 50.6 in August compared to the previous month.
With the exeption of Japan, the PMI data for advanced economies continued to deteriorate in August.
The composite PMI indicator for the euro area, one of the important trade partners of Türkiye, decreased by 1.9 points to 46.7 in August.
Despite an increase of 0.8 points in August, the manufacturing PMI stood at 43.5, recording one of the lowest levels since June 2020.
The services PMI, in particular, remained on the decline in August and decreased by 2.9 points to 47.9, which is below its threshold value.
This indicates that the slowdown in euro area’s economic activity will also continue in the second half of the year.
The manufacturing industry PMI of emerging economies rose month-on-month by 1.2 points to 51.4 in August while the services PMI dropped by 1.5 points to 53.1.
In the Chinese economy, the composite PMI maintained its downward trend in August and dropped by 0.2 points to 51.7.
The manufacturing industry PMI exceeded its threshold value by increasing 1.8 points to 51, while the services PMI fell by 2.4 points to 51.8.
These developments suggest that the services sector, which was an important driving force of global economic activity in the first half of the year, has lost strength in recent months.
Portfolio flows to emerging markets continued in June and July on the back of improving risk sentiment.
While there was an inflow of approximately USD 63.2 billion to equity markets in the first seven months of 2023, bond markets saw an inflow of around USD 1.1 billion.
In August (31 July-1 September 2023), driven by the fluctuation in global risk appetite, there was a total outflow of USD 22.1 billion, USD 20.5 billion of which was from equity markets, mainly from China, Taiwan, South Africa and Indonesia.
Inflation readings were above expectations in July and August.
As the strong course of domestic demand and the stickiness of services inflation persist, the increase in oil prices and the ongoing deterioration in inflation expectations pose additional upside risks to inflation.
Consumer prices rose by 9.09% in August, and annual inflation increased by 11.11 points to 58.94%.
This was due to the carry-over effects of tax and administered price adjustments from July, the lagged effects of the depreciation in the Turkish lira and wage increases, as well as the rise in global energy prices and the stickiness of services prices.
The high level of fuel prices due to frequent price revisions had an additional impact on the rise in inflation through direct and indirect channels, and contributed to widespread price hikes.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 17.85 points to 20.86 points in the services group (3.00 points of increase), from 15.27 points to 18.13 points in the food and non- alcoholic beverages group (2.86 points of increase), from 12.95 points to 15.54 points in the core goods group (2.60 points of increase), from -0.39 points to 2.11 points in the energy group (2.51 points of increase), and from 2.16 points to 2.30 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.14 points of increase).
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages group increased by 8.48% in August, and annual inflation rose by 12.14 points to 72.86%.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a significant increase 2 in prices of fresh fruits and vegetables in this period, with fruit prices in the lead.
In the other unprocessed food group, increases in prices of eggs as well as dried fruits and nuts were notable.
The monthly price increase in the processed food group grew stronger at 11.17% compared to the previous month.
Bread and cereals, bread in particular, as well as milk and dairy products, fats and oils, and non-alcoholic beverages posted noticeable price hikes.
Energy prices went up by 14.23% in August, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 16.89 points to 14.03%.
Monthly energy inflation was driven by the carry-over effect of the tax increase in mid- July as well as soaring international energy prices.
Fuel and bottled gas prices surged by 26.11% and 23.93%, respectively.
Municipal water prices also posted a sharp increase (7.43%) in August.
The increase in services prices remained strong at 9.19% in August, and annual services inflation rose by 9.92 points to 79.57%.
In this period, price hikes spread across the subgroups, and annual inflation increased in all subgroups.
Prices of transport services posted their highest increase in the 2003-based index with a monthly hike of 27.62% due to the drastic rise in fuel prices.
Large price increases in transport services also continued in September, albeit with some loss of momentum.
The continued significant price increases in the restaurants-hotels subgroup, driven by the ongoing negative outlook for food prices as well as strong tourism demand and the lagged effects of wage hikes, continued in August and prices surged by 7.09%.
The monthly price increase in the rents subgroup strengthened somewhat further and was measured at 7.90%.
In the other services subgroup, prices increased by 7.19%, led by maintenance-repair of personal transport vehicles, health services and recreation-culture services.
The price increase in communication services was higher at 5.14% compared to past months.
Prices of core goods were up by 8.57% in August, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 7.72 points to 51.97%.
For core goods, where the exchange rate pass-through is high, prices increased sharply across subgroups, while annual inflation rose in all subgroups.
The monthly price increase in durable goods (excluding gold) remained strong at 7.82%, with significant increases in prices of automobiles, white goods and furniture in August.
In the other core goods subgroup, the carry-over effects of tax adjustments and revision of the reference euro exchange rate for medicine prices were felt, and prices posted a widespread increase of 9.92%.
In the clothing and footwear group, prices rose (8.25%) contrary to the seasonal averages.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group increased by 3.77%, and annual inflation in this group rose by 5.40 points to 51.98%.
This development was mainly due to the carry-over effects into August as the price hikes stemming from last month's tax adjustments were reflected in the index on a day-weighted basis.
The rise in tobacco prices will continue in September as well due to the price adjustments by producer companies.
The underlying trend of inflation remained elevated in August.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in the B index slightly rose while that in the C index remained flat.
This outlook is also confirmed by alternative core inflation indicators.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.8% and 8.5%, respectively, in February 2022, stood at 7.0% and 7.2% in August 2023.
In August, the seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 9.8% and 9.2%, respectively.
Leading indicators suggest that the high price hikes over the last two months will decelerate.
Preliminary data suggest that the rise in food prices has lost pace compared to previous months, while the lagged effects of wages, exchange rates and taxes on inflation have weakened significantly.
Meanwhile, services prices remain elevated due to seasonal factors related to the opening of schools, and the impact of rising oil prices on energy items continues.
Gross Domestic Produc (GDP) data for the second quarter of the year suggest that the economic activity remained robust, particularly driven by domestic demand.
Recent indicators and high- frequency data point that, in the third quarter, economic activity maintained its strength led by domestic demand, despite a quarterly slowdown in growth momentum.
In July, the retail sales volume index displayed a significant rise of 34.8% year-on-year, due to calendar effects.
Following the 5.8% rise in the second quarter, the quarterly rate of increase lost some momentum and came down to 3.9%.
The upward trend in card expenditures continued in August.
In August, manufacturing firms’ registered orders from the domestic market increased by 8.6 points on an annual basis, while, in seasonally adjusted terms, they displayed a limited decrease on a quarterly basis.
Manufacturing firms’ expectations in August for future export orders and domestic market orders declined on a monthly basis, more markedly in expectations for export orders.
Meanwhile, interviews with firms point to a loss of momentum at the sectoral level due to the effect of high rates of price increases on the purchasing power.
In July, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index decreased by 0.4% month-on-month, while, adjusted for calendar effects, it increased by 7.4% on an annual basis.
The underlying trend in industrial production is stronger when sectors typically exhibiting high volatility, such as computers, other transportation and recorded media, are excluded.
Excluding these sectors, industrial production in July is stronger than the general index, with a 0.9% month- on-month increase.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased by 0.9% in July compared to the second quarter average.
In August, the seasonally adjusted capacity utilization rate in the manufacturing industry decreased, led by the vehicles sector due to the annual shutdown in factories for maintenance purposes.
Meanwhile, indicators for the third quarter suggest that excluding the vehicles sector, capacity utilization rate remained flat on a quarterly basis.
As of July, seasonally adjusted employment was recorded at 31.7 million.
In this period, employment increased by 0.3% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased by 0.1 points.
In July, unemployment rate decreased by 0.2 points to 9.4% from 9.6% in June.
In July, in line with the significant rise in foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 2 billion month-on-month to USD 58.5 billion.
Despite the improvement in the energy balance owing to the ongoing decline in energy prices on an annual basis, this increase was mainly driven by strong increases in imports of gold, investment goods and consumption goods.
In this context, the strong course of domestic demand has an increasing effect on the annualized current account deficit through imports of consumption goods.
As of July, the annualized balance of payments-defined foreign trade deficit widened by USD 37.7 billion year-on-year to USD 100.6 billion.
In the same period, the annualized services surplus rose by USD 7.3 billion to USD 51.7 billion.
According to provisional foreign trade data for August, compared to the same period last year, gold imports increased by USD 13.5 billion to USD 22.8 billion in the first eight months of the year.
High-frequency data suggest that gold imports, which accelerated in August, are still above historical averages, despite some slowdown in September on the back of the measures taken.
Provisional foreign trade data for August and high-frequency data for September imply a decline in both imports and exports in seasonally and calendar adjusted terms in the August-September period.
Tourism revenues, which have been strong throughout the year, continue to contribute positively to the current account balance.
Travel revenues increased by USD 3.8 billion in the first seven months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 24.3 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 19.2% year-on-year to 25.1 million in the first seven months of the year.
The increase observed in July in energy commodity prices, which had been decreasing since the second half of 2022, continued in August as well.
Non-energy commodity prices, which have remained almost flat in recent months, posted a decline in August.
As of the first half of September, energy commodity prices continued to rise, while non-energy commodity prices remained relatively flat.
Following the decision to continue production cuts, the price of Brent crude oil maintained its upward trend and hovered above USD 90 in the first half of September, marking the highest level since November 2022.
In the energy group, international propane and butane as well as coal prices continued to increase in USD terms.
Thus, exchange rates and international energy commodity developments as well as the lagged effects of rising labor costs stood as the main factors exerting pressure on producer prices.
In August, domestic producer prices rose by 5.89%, pushing annual inflation up by 4.91 points to 49.41%.
According to the main industrial groupings, annual inflation increased across all subgroups, while the monthly increase in energy producer prices was significant due to international commodity and exchange rate developments.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained flat in August while international transportation costs maintained their low levels despite a slight increase.
Exchange rates, which retreated after the MPC decision in August, remained stable in September.
Adjustment in the minimum wage in July 2023, accompanied by wage adjustments for civil servants and public sector workers, and wage hikes becoming broad-based had important impacts on inflation in July and August through the cost channel.
Price increases in the services sector became stronger as of July.
Monthly price increases in the services sector, which displays inertia compared to goods, are higher compared to 2022.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 65%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 80%.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering approximately 60% above its historical average, indicating that the increases showed a generalized pattern across the sector.
Given the weakening in lagged effects of the minimum wage and the recent deceleration in food price increases, the uptrend in prices in the sector is expected to lose some momentum in the following months.
In fact, the recent significant increases in fuel prices driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax hikes have rapidly passed through to transport services prices.
The outlook for international oil prices is likely to continue to exert pressure on transport services prices in the upcoming period.
In addition to rising house prices and backward-indexation behavior, imbalances between supply and demand in the real estate market are pushing rent increases upwards and adversely affectting consumer inflation.
Seasonal effects will be apparent on services prices due to the opening of schools in September.
This period sees high price hikes as service items such as university tuition fees, student accomodation fees and school bus fares are priced at certain times of the year (time-dependent pricing).
The short-run effects of the recent tax adjustments on consumer inflation were observed in July and August, along with the carry-over effects arising from the number of days calculated.
The direct effects of the tax hikes have largely played out.
In the coming months, the indirect effects of the tax hikes are expected to continue, albeit at a weaker pace, depending on the frequency of price changes by firms.
The consumer inflation diffusion index continued to rise in August, remaining three standard deviations above its historical average.
According to the September results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 2.93 points from 42.01% to 44.94%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation rose by 1.33 points from 22.54% to 23.87%, and the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised downwards by 0.39 points from 10.42% to 10.03%.
These factors imply a year-end inflation close to the upper bound of the forecast range provided in the Inflation Report (Report).
The Committee evaluated that tax regulations and cost pressures stemming from wages and exchange rates, which have been pushing up inflation, have broadly passed through to prices, and that the underlying trend in monthly inflation is on course to decline.
Given the monetary tightening stance, the Committee is determined to establish the disinflation course in 2024 in line with the Report.
As of 8 September 2023, the retail loan balance increased by 107.7% in credit cards, 75.8% in vehicle loans, 34.0% in personal loans, and 24.2% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 54.4% in total.
Meanwhile, personal loan growth, which lost momentum due to the expansion of the scope of the loan growth-based securities maintenance practice, increased by 1.8% since 18 August.
In the same period, although their growth slowed down to 6.9%, personal credit cards maintained their strong trend, with an annual growth rate remaining flat at 181.6%.
For Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans, which grew by 1.3% compared to the previous MPC meeting period, annual growth stood at 61.3%.
Average personal loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts), which, due to the policy rate hike, have posted a significant increase of 1,260 basis points since the previous MPC meeting period, became 59.7% as of 8 September 2023.
In the same period, vehicle loan rates rose from 38.1% to 46.5%, and housing loan rates rose from 36.4% to 38.9%.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased by 931 basis points to 40.6%.
Turkish lira commercial loans, which increased by 0.3% across the sector in June, grew 2.4% in July and 2% in August.
Turkish lira deposit rates stood at 24.9% in the week ending 18 August and at 31.6% in the week ending 8 September.
Owing to the policy rate hike and the recent steps taken as part of the simplification of the macroprudential framework, it is evaluated that there was 6 a growth in the demand for Turkish lira investments.
Simultaneously, loan and deposit rates also rose in tandem, resulting in the strengthening of the monetary transmission mechanism.
Foreign direct investment, improvement in external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, the positive impact of tourism revenues on current account balance, and increasing domestic and foreign demand for Turkish lira denominated assets will contribute significantly to price stability.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on 22 May 2023 amid domestic uncertainties, declined to 412 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period and to 385 basis points on 20 September 2023.
Similarly, one-month and 12-month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira, which declined noticeably in the same period remained flat in this MPC meeting period at 15.7 and 28.9 points, respectively.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 2.47 billion since June, USD 0.81 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.66 billion to the equity market.
International reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) maintain the strong upward trend they assumed in June.
Having declined from USD 128.8 billion at the end of 2022 to USD 98.5 billion at the end of May, gross international reserves of the CBRT rose to USD 120.6 billion as of 8 September 2023. .
Accordingly, the Committee raised the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 25% to 30%.
To increase the functionality of market mechanisms and strengthen macro financial stability, the Committee continues to simplify and improve the existing micro- and macroprudential framework.
In this context, recent regulations targeting a rising share of Turkish lira deposits strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism.
The Committee assesses that the rebalancing in domestic demand resulting from credit tightening decisions and the the improvement in the distribution of financing sources will have a positive impact on factor productivity.
Global inflation has been decreasing recently, but it remains above the long-term averages and central bank targets.
In September, consumer inflation was negatively affected by energy prices, while the stickiness in the core inflation trend started to wane in advanced economies.
Compared to the previous .
Committee (MPC) meeting, consumer inflation decreased from 4.27% to 3.71% in advanced economies and increased from 6.48% to 6.54% in emerging economies1.
Nevertheless, headline inflation declined in many emerging economies except some large economies such as Brazil, Russia and Turkey.
Inflation continues to hover above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 for advanced and emerging economies are 3.3% and 6.7%, respectively.
Compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation declined from 4.57% to 4.21% in advanced economies, whereas it rose from 6.57% to 7.00% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 are 3.3% in the USA and 3.4% in the euro area, while core inflation expectations are 3.5% and 4.1%, respectively.
Despite widespread decline in commodity prices recently, geopolitical risks, financial conditions and supply-side factors lead to volatility in oil prices and a rise in natural gas prices.
Brent crude oil prices per barrel have fluctuated in the range of 88-99 USD since the previous MPC meeting while the Title Transfer Facility (TTF) price, which serves as a benchmark for European natural gas prices, has increased by 31.9%.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 30.4% above the average of the last ten years.
The index fell by 26.3% compared to the highest level reached last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined by 14.5% compared to the peak it reached last year, is 11.8% above the average of the last ten years.
This still has an impact on inflation due to the high share of food in consumer basket.
As a result, many central banks around the world are expected to continue to keep their policy rates at levels that will maintain the tightness of the monetary stance and central banks of advanced economies are generally expected to ease more slowly and at a later pace.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 153 meetings in the last 20 months, and policy rates were increased 1 Advanced economies: USA, Czech Republic, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Emerging Economies: Brazil, China, Indonesia, Philippines, South Africa, India, Colombia, Hungary, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Chile, Thailand, Turkey.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 225 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 103 of these meetings.
The results of the implemented monetary policies have begun affecting financial conditions, and central banks' emphasis on tightening financing and credit conditions has become stronger.
The recent rise in uncertainties has had a tightening effect on global financial conditions, and central banks of Thailand and Indonesia raised policy rates in September and October, respectively, emphasizing this development in their decision announcements.
Meanwhile, central banks of Brazil, Peru, Poland and Chile continued with policy rate cuts on the back of the decline in consumer inflation.
However, given the high levels of inflation and the central banks’ policy communications, it is expected that the tightness of monetary policy will continue in these economies.
Despite the flat global growth outlook, tightness in labor markets persist.
The index is projected to grow by 1.7% in 2023, which is approximately 0.4 points higher than the lowest level in January.
However, when the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022 is considered, a notable slowdown in Türkiye’s foreign demand is observed on an annual basis.
Having fallen in June, July and August, global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) significantly slowed down in September.
In September, the global manufacturing industry PMI edged up by 0.1 points compared to the previous month to 49.1 points, while the global services PMI decreased by 0.3 points to 50.8.
Thus, the global composite PMI index was down by 0.1 point to 50.5 in September and remained almost the same as the previous month.
In September, driven by the manufacturing industry, the composite PMI for advanced economies increased by 0.2 points month-on-month to 49.7.
This development was mainly driven by the slight recovery in the PMI data in September for the euro area, one of Turkey's major trade partners.
However, according to the early (flash) PMI data for October, the euro area composite PMI indicator decreased by 0.6 points to 46.5.
The manufacturing sector PMI indicator declined by 0.4 points to 43 in October, recording one of the lowest levels since June 2020.
The services PMI, in particular, declined once again in October, decreased by 0.8 points to 47.8 and continued to hover below the threshold value.
The manufacturing industry PMI of emerging economies decreased by 0.5 points compared to the previous month to 50.9 in September while the services PMI dropped by 1.2 points to 51.9.
In the Chinese economy, the composite PMI maintained its downward trend in August and dropped by 0.8 points to 50.9.
The manufacturing industry PMI decreased by 0.4 points to 50.6, while the services PMI fell by 1.6 points to 50.2.
These developments suggest that the services sector, which was an important driving force of global economic activity in the first half of the year, has lost strength in recent months and global growth rate has slowed down to a limited extent.
Portfolio flows to emerging markets, which improved in the June-July period due to risk sentiment, turned to outflows in the August-October period.
The recent portfolio outflows from emerging markets were driven by the expectation that central banks of advanced economies will maintain their tight monetary policy stance for a longer period, fluctuations in the global risk appetite and uncertainties regarding the Chinese economy.
In the August- October period (31 July -13 October 2023), there was a total outflow of USD 47.7 billion, USD 43.3 billion of which was from equity markets, mainly from China, Taiwan, South Korea, Brazil, South Africa and Indonesia.
Turkey, which is included in the inflation set, is excluded from the emerging economies set in the policy rate analysis.
Recent developments such as rising geopolitical risks, the course of energy prices, diverging economic growth outlooks across countries, increases in US long-term interest rates and portfolio outflows from emerging markets suggest that uncertainties regarding the global economy are increasing.
In the third quarter, although inflation readings were above expectations, it displayed a more positive outlook in September.
The pass-through from tax regulations and cost pressures stemming from wages and exchange rates, which have been recently impactful, has been largely completed Consumer prices rose by 4.75% in September, and annual inflation increased by 2.59 points to 61.5%.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 20.9 points to 22.9 points in the services group (up by 2.09 points); from 2.30 points to 2.81 points in alcohol, tobacco and gold group (up by 0.51 points); from 18.1 points to 18.4 points, the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (up by 0.32 points); from 15.5 points to 15.7 points, in the core goods group (up by 0.21 points), but decreased from 2.11 points to 1.57 points in the energy group (down by 0.54 points).
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages group increased by 3.32% in September, and annual inflation rose by 2.28 points to 75.1%.
Price increases spread across the group, while the deceleration in price increases in bread and cereals as well as fresh fruits and vegetables compared to past months limited the monthly group inflation.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed that the slowdown in fresh fruits and vegetables was driven by vegetable prices.
Price hikes in eggs, sugar, nuts, milk and dairy products, fats and oils as well as red meat were notable.
Energy prices went up by 3.83% in September, and the group’s annual inflation fell by 3.78 points to 10.3%.
Price hikes in global markets in September, with crude oil in the lead, became the main driver of energy prices.
Solid fuels, bottled gas and fuel oil stood out among the group with price increases of 6.11%, 5.93% and 4.62%, respectively.
Moreover, municipal water prices remained on an upward track with an increase of 4.42%.
Prices of services rose further strongly by 7.88%, and annual services inflation increased by 6.89 points to 86.5%.
In September, price increases spread across the group, pushing annual inflation up across all subgroups.
In this period, price hikes in associated services items were notable following the opening of schools.
Prices of transport services continued to rise strongly due to the substantial rise in fuel prices, which was driven mainly by the increase of 65.4% in school bus fares in September.
Monthly increases in rents strengthened further and reached 9.52%.
Prices in other services increased by 8.46%, with education services being the leading item following the hike in university tuition fees of 127.7%.
Monthly inflation in the restaurants-hotels subgroup was limited compared to previous months with 4.15%, led by catering services due to the slowdown in food prices, while accommodation item posted high-rated increases driven by dormitory fees.
Prices of core goods were up by 2.59% in September, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 1.26 points to 53.2%.
Price increases weakened across subgroups, while annual inflation receded in other core goods and rose in durable goods (excluding gold) and clothing and footwear.
The monthly price increase in durable goods (excluding gold) slowed to 2.58% month-on-month, yet divergences were seen within the subgroup.
In September, automobile prices remained almost flat, while price increases in white goods and furniture maintained the robust course.
Price increases in other core goods were more moderate, and monthly inflation stood at 2.66%.
In the clothing and footwear subgroup, prices rose by 2.51%, bringing annual inflation up to 31.4%.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group increased by 10%, and annual inflation in this group rose by 15.2 points to 67.2%, which stem from was a company-led price hike of 11.1% in tobacco prices.
Indicators of the underlying trend of inflation weakened in September3.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases receded both in the B and C indices in September.
This outlook is also confirmed by the declining figures in Median and SATRIM indicators.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.78% and 8.49% respectively in February 2022, stood at 7.89% and 7.88 % respectively in September 2023.
In September, the seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 4.87% and 5.50%, respectively.
Leading indicators suggest that the fall in the underlying trend of inflation, which started in September, strengthened further in October as cost shocks have been largely reflected in prices.
According to preliminary data, price increases lost momentum across groups, while the positive course is notable in the prices of durable goods, while the services group exhibit higher price increases compared to other groups.
The strong course of domestic demand, the stickiness of services inflation, and the deterioration in inflation expectations continue to put upward pressure on inflation.
In addition, global energy prices, which started to recede from the levels they hit towards the end of September, pose a risk with a re-increase amid geopolitical problems.
On the other hand, while domestic demand lost some momentum, the increase in inflation expectations slowed down.
Following the increase in demand for Turkish lira savings instruments due to monetary tightening, some effects of monetary transmission on demand are gradually appearing.
Domestic demand indicators, price reductions in sectors such as durable goods as well as plans thereof, and orders and related expectations provide leading signals of a rebalancing in demand.
Accordingly, imports have fallen and the foreign trade balance has displayed a relatively favorable outlook.
Recent indicators and high-frequency data point to a quarterly slowdown in growth momentum in the third quarter.
In August, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the retail sales volume index decreased by 4.7% on a monthly basis.
The annual growth of the retail sales volume index fell by 14.4 points to 17.2%.
Following the 5.4% rise in the second quarter, the quarterly rate of increase slowed down to 1.6%.
The upward trend in card expenditures continued in September.
On the other hand, in realized terms, the rise in card expenditures decelerated on a quarterly basis.
In October, manufacturing firms’ registered orders from the domestic market increased by 7.5 points on an annual basis, while, in seasonally adjusted terms, they displayed a quarter-on-quarter decline in the last quarter.
An analysis of the broad economic categories reveals that the decline was more pronounced in the durable goods group.
In this period, manufacturing firms' expectations for future export and domestic market orders increased slightly on a quarterly basis.
Interviews with firms point to a loss of momentum at the sectoral level due to the slowdown in demand for consumption goods, particularly durable goods.
In order to determine the developments in the underlying trend, the seasonally adjusted monthly changes and 3-month moving average changes of these core indicators are closely monitored.
In August, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index decreased by 0.8% month-on-month, while, adjusted for calendar effects, it increased by 3.1% on an annual basis.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased by 0.5% in August compared to the second quarter average.
Excluding the sectors with high monthly volatility, industrial production was higher in August with a quarterly increase of 0.9%.
In October, the seasonally adjusted capacity utilization rate in the manufacturing industry remained flat at 76.8% with a decline of 0.1 points.
As of August, seasonally adjusted employment was recorded at 31.7 million.
In this period, seasonally adjusted employment increased by 0.3% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased by 0.1 points.
In August, unemployment rate decreased by 0.2 points to 9.2% from 9.4% in July.
In August, in line with the decrease in foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit fell by USD 2.1 billion month-on-month to USD 57 billion.
This fall was driven by the improvement in the energy balance due to the ongoing annual decline in energy prices, despite the rise in the cumulative gold trade deficit.
Provisional foreign trade data for September indicate, in seasonally adjusted terms, a moderate monthly increase in exports as against a decrease on the imports side across all subgroups of goods.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for October, implies a limited improvement in exports and a flat course in imports as well as an annual decline.
Although gold imports decreased in the September-October period, they are still above historical averages.
As of August, the annual services balance surplus increased by USD 5.1 billion compared to the same period of the previous year, reaching USD 51.2 billion.
Travel revenues increased by USD 4.1 billion in the first eight months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 30.5 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 15.7% year-on-year to 32.5 million in the first eight months of the year.
The increase that started in July in energy commodity prices, which had been decreasing since the second half of 2022, continued in September as well.
Non-energy commodity prices, which have remained almost flat in recent months, did not exhibit a significant change in September.
In the first three weeks of October, commodity prices, including energy prices, were on the decline.
However, Brent crude oil prices, which fell until the first week of October, are on the rise again in a highly volatile state due to the geopolitical problems.
In addition to these global developments, industrial electricity and natural gas tariffs and electricity producers' natural gas tariffs were raised by 20% in early October.
Thus, the lagged effects of exchange rate and rising labor costs on producer prices weakened, while energy costs increased.
The recent period has seen heightened risks to global energy prices due to geopolitical developments.
In September, domestic producer prices rose by 3.40%, pulling annual inflation down by 1.97 points to 47.4%.
According to the main industrial groupings, the energy group stood out with a high monthly price hike of 6.12% on the back of global energy commodity prices.
Annual inflation decreased in the energy group due to the base effect, while it displayed a more limited change in other main groups.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained mild in September.
Having remained almost flat after the MPC decision in September, exchange rates increased moderately in October.
Adjustment in the minimum wage in July 2023, accompanied by wage adjustments for civil servants and public sector workers, and wage hikes becoming broad-based had important impacts on inflation in the third quarter of the year, especially through the cost channel.
The services sector has posted strong price increases as of July.
Monthly price increases in the services sector, which displays significant inertia, are higher compared to 2022.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 69%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 86%.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering approximately 33% above its historical average, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector.
Seasonal effects were apparent on services prices due to the opening of schools in September.
This period saw high price hikes, as services items such as university tuition fees, student accommodation fees and school bus fares are priced at a certain time of the year.
The September figures are an example of the sector's ability to spread the effects of shocks over time.
Transport services recorded a strong price increase in September, led by school bus item.
The unstable outlook for international crude oil prices remains a risk factor for transport services prices in the upcoming period.
Rising house prices, backward-indexation behavior, and imbalances between supply and demand in the real estate market are pushing rent increases upwards and adversely affecting consumer inflation.
On the other hand, data monitored on online platforms indicate that rents in big cities have tended to slow down recently.
In the restaurants and hotels subgroup that is significantly affected by food, wage and tourism developments, monthly price increases display a persistent outlook.
While the weakening in lagged effects of the minimum wage remains in place, and the relative importance of food prices in the outlook for restaurant and hotel prices is increasing.
The consumer inflation diffusion index remained elevated in September and stood at two standard deviations above its historical average.
The month-on-month increase in inflation expectations is slowing down.
According to the October results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.79 points from 67.22% to 68.01%, the 12-month-ahead inflation 6 expectation increased by 0.34 points from 44.94 % to 45.28 %, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation rose by 1.95 points from 23.87% to 25.82%, and the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards by 1.73 points from 10.03% to 11.76%.
In this framework, while the year-end inflation is projected to be close to the upper bound of the forecast range provided in the Inflation Report (Report), it is evaluated that the underlying trend in monthly inflation is on course to decline.
On the other hand, geopolitical developments pose risks to the inflation outlook due to oil prices.
Through the monetary tightening process, the Committee is determined to establish the disinflation course in 2024 in line with the Report.
It is assessed that the initial impact of monetary tightening on financial indicators has started to be observed.
While market interest rates have moved in tandem with the policy rate, retail loan growth has assumed a downtrend.
Turkish lira deposits increased whereas FX- denominated and FX-protected deposits started to decrease.
The normalization in loan growth and composition continued.
As of 13 October 2023, the retail loan balance increased by 118.9% in credit cards, 77.2% in vehicle loans, 36.6% in general-purpose loans, and 23.5% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 58.9% in total.
The average 4 week growth rate of retail loans, which continued to lose momentum due to monetary tightening and other steps taken, stood at 2.37% as of 13 October 2023.
In the same period, average 4 week growth rates of vehicle and general- purpose loans materialized at 0,63% and 1,41%, respectively.
Although personal credit cards maintained their strong trend with an average 4 week growth rate of 4,82%, it continued to slow down.
On the other hand, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans experienced an average 4 week growth rate of 2,18 in the same period.
Average personal loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts), which have increased by 165 basis points since the previous MPC meeting period parallel to the rise in banks’ funding costs, became 60.5% as of 13 October 2023.
Having remained flat during the same period, vehicle and housing loan rates materialized at 46.7% and 41.5%, respectively as of 13 October 2023.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased by 608 basis points to 49.3%.
Turkish lira commercial loans, which increased by 0.34% across the sector in June, grew 2.38% in July, 2.26 % in August, and 2.52 % in September.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira deposit rates stood at 24.9% in the week ending 18 August, at 33.5% in the week ending 15 September, and at 37.9% in the week ending 13 October.
In parallel, Turkish lira deposits have started increasing while FX-protected and FX-denominated deposits have both declined.
Owing to the policy rate hike and the recent steps taken as part of the simplification of the macroprudential framework, it is evaluated that there was a growth in the demand for Turkish lira denominated assest.
It is assessed that the monetary transmission mechanism has been strengthening due to the recent steps taken within the scope of the simplification process in the macroprudential framework and the increase in the demand for Turkish lira instruments with the increase in the policy rate, and the rise in loan and deposit rates together.
Foreign direct investment, stable course of external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, the positive impact of rebalancing in demand on current 7 account balance, and the increase in domestic and foreign demand for Turkish lira denominated assets will significantly contribute to price stability.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on 22 May 2023 amid domestic uncertainties, declined to 385 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period but rose to 417 basis points as of 25 October 2023 parallel to other emerging economies due to the recently escalating geopolitical risks.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 1.69 billion since June, USD 0.50 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.19 billion to the equity market.
International reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) maintain the strong upward trend they assumed in June.
Having declined from USD 128.8 billion at the end of 2022 to USD 98.5 billion at the end of May, gross international reserves of the CBRT rose to USD 126.1billion as of 20 October 2023. .
Given the inflation outlook and the upside risks, the Committee evaluated strengthening the monetary policy framework in line with the price stability objective.
The Committee drew attention to the risks that high inflation may pose to macroeconomic stability and especially financial stability.
Accordingly, the Committee raised the policy rate (the one- week repo auction rate) from 30% to 35%.
Guided by impact analyses, the simplification process is advancing gradually.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities and financial stability with a holistic approach.
In this context, monetary transmission mechanism will be further strengthened by taking additional steps to increase the share of Turkish lira deposits.
While the policy rate, the main policy instrument, affect monetary and financial conditions and expectations, these decisions aim to stabilize excess Turkish lira liquidity and consumption demand and increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The Turkish lira liquidity inflows to the financial system stemming from the foreign exchange difference payments of FX-protected deposit accounts due to the exchange rate 8 developments are closely monitored.
Committee (MPC) meeting period, consumer inflation decreased from 3.71% to 3.36% in advanced economies and from 6.54% to 6.08% in emerging economies1.
Compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation declined from 4.21% to 3.97% in advanced economies and from 7% to 6.50% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 are 3.4% in the USA and 3.2% in the Euro Area, while core inflation expectations are 3.5% and 4.0%, respectively.
Despite widespread decline in commodity prices recently, geopolitical risks, financial conditions and supply-side factors cause oil prices to remain volatile.
Brent crude oil prices per barrel have fluctuated in the range of USD 78-90 since the previous MPC meeting while the Title Transfer Facility (TTF) price, which serves as a benchmark for European natural gas prices, has decreased moderately.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 30% above the average of the last ten years.
The index fell 26.5% from the highest level reached last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined 14.3% from the peak it reached last year, is 12.1% above the average of the last ten years.
As a result, many central banks around the world are expected to continue to keep their policy rates at levels that will maintain the tightness of the monetary stance and central banks of advanced economies are generally expected to ease more slowly and at a later date.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 160 meetings in the last 21 months, and policy rates were increased in 106 of these meetings2.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 239 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 105 of these meetings.
Emerging Economies: Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Africa, India, Colombia, Hungary, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Chile, Thailand, Türkiye.
Türkiye, which is included in the inflation set, is excluded from the emerging economies set in the policy rate analysis.
Meanwhile, central banks of Brazil, Peru, and Chile continued with policy rate cuts on the back of the decline in consumer inflation, while the Central Bank of Hungary also reduced its policy rate both in October and November.
On the other hand, the Central Bank of Poland, which had started a rate-cut cycle earlier, underlined the potential risks that fiscal policies may create and kept the policy rate unchanged.
Given the high levels of inflation and the central banks’ policy communications, it is expected that the tightness of monetary policy will continue in these economies.
Despite the flat global growth outlook, tightness in labor markets persists.
The global growth index, which is weighted with the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained flat.
The index is projected to grow 1.7% in 2023, which is approximately 0.4 percentage points higher than the lowest level in January.
However, considering the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022, a notable slowdown in Türkiye’s foreign demand is observed on an annual basis.
The slowdown in the global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) in the third quarter of the year also continued in October.
In October, the global manufacturing industry PMI edged down 0.4 points on a monthly basis to 48.8, while the global services PMI decreased 0.3 points to 50.4.
Thus, the global composite PMI index dropped 0.4 points over the previous month to the threshold value of 50 in October.
The deterioration in the global PMI data was driven by both advanced and emerging economies.
The PMI data for the services sector, which was the major driving force of global economic activity, particularly in the first half of the year, continued to decline for both sets of countriesin October.
In addition, the manufacturing industry PMI of emerging economies decreased 0.8 points compared to the previous month to 50.1 in October, closely approaching the threshold value.
The fact that China’s manufacturing industry PMI dropped 1.1 points to 49.5 in October played an important role in this decline.
Despite increasing by 0.1 points in October over the previous month, the manufacturing industry PMI for advanced economies continued to hover below the threshold value with its level at 47.5.
In October, the USA, Japan and the United Kingdom displayed a more favorable outlook than in the previous month.
Likewise, the manufacturing industry PMI and services PMI for the euro area posted a limited increase in November compared to October, reaching 43.8 and 48.2, respectively.
Thus, the composite PMI for the euro area remained below the threshold value in November, standing at 47.1 despite an uptick of 0.6 points.
This indicates that the slowdown in Euro Area’s economic activity will also continue in the second half of the year.
In the Chinese economy, the composite PMI maintained its downward trend in October and dropped 0.9 points to the threshold value of 50.
These developments suggest that the services sector, which was an important driving force of global economic activity in the first half of the year, has lost strength in recent months and the global growth rate has slowed down slightly.
In the August-October period (31 July-27 October 2023), which was shaped by the expectation that the central banks of advanced economies will maintain their tight monetary policy stance for a longer period, the fluctuations in the global risk appetite, and the uncertainty regarding the Chinese economy, there was a total outflow of USD 61.8 billion from emerging economies, mainly from China, Taiwan, South Korea, Brazil, South Africa and Indonesia, USD 55.8 billion of which was from equity markets.
As of November, the reduced risk of the spread of the war in the Middle East to other countries as well as the strengthened market perception that the rate hiking cycles in advanced economies are coming to an end led to an increase in the risk appetite and thus, portfolio inflows to emerging economies started again.
In the period 30 October to 17 November, there was an inflow of USD 6.4 billion to equity markets and USD 4.7 billion to bond markets.
While geopolitical risks have partially eased recently, energy prices and US long-term interest rates declined.
However, the high volatility in oil prices persists and the uncertainty about the global economy remains in place.
Consumer prices rose 3.43% in October, while annual inflation decreased by 0.17 percentage points to 61.4%.
Headline inflation edged down in October and remains in line with the outlook presented in the most recent Inflation Report.
Meanwhile, the existing level of domestic demand, the stickiness in services inflation, and geopolitical risks keep inflation pressures alive.
Despite having receded from the readings at the end of September, global energy prices remain highly volatile due to geopolitical problems.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 22.9 percentage points to 23.4 percantage points in the services group (up by 0.43 percentage points), from 1.57 percentage points to 1.74 percentage points in the energy group (up by 0.17 percentage points), from 15.7 perccentage points to 15.8 percentage points in the core goods group (up by 0.04 percentage points), but decreased from 2.81 percentage points to 2.60 percentage points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (down by 0.21 percentage points), and from 18.4 percentage points to 17.8 percentage points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (down by 0.60 percentage points).
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose 3.20% in October, while annual inflation declined 3.15 percentage points to 72.0%.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed that the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables increased to a limited extent, led by vegetable prices.
Price increases remained strong in the food group excluding fresh fruits and vegetables.
In October, price hikes were noteworthy in red meat, white meat, eggs, nuts, pulses, fats and oils, and coffee-tea-cocoa.
Despite the strong price hikes in these items, the monthly price increase in the food group was limited by the mild increase in prices of items with a large weight such as bread and cereals, fresh fruits and vegetables, and milk and dairy products.
Energy prices went up 3.62% in October, and annual energy inflation increased 1.35 percentage points to 11.6%.
The limit for free use of natural gas was slightly exceeded due to seasonal conditions, and the prices reflected on the basket rose.
Accordingly, the natural gas item pushed monthly headline inflation up 0.22 percentage points in October.
Following the developments in crude oil prices, fuel prices fell 2.15%.
Driven by the lagged effects of global commodity prices, solid fuel and bottled gas prices increased 6.91% and 4.67%, respectively.
In addition, municipal water prices rose 7.92% in October and continued to affect energy prices unfavorably.
Prices in the services group were up 3.83% in October, and the group’s annual inflation increased 2.19 percentage points to 88.7%.
Annual inflation declined in transport services but rose in other subgroups.
When rent subgroup is excluded, the increase in services group annual inflation is more limited.
In the rents subgroup, in which the backward-indexation behavior is strong and the sector-specific supply-demand imbalances continue to be observed, the monthly increase was 7.91%, and annual inflation reached 100.7%.
Prices in the restaurants-hotels subgroup rose 3.51%, driven by the catering services item.
Fuelled by mobile phone call as well as internet fees, communication services posted a monthly price increase of 4.08%, bringing annual inflation to 57.2%.
The monthly increase in prices of the other services subgroup, which was negatively affected by the education-related items in the previous month, was milder at 2.90%.
Parallel to the fall in fuel prices, the price increase in transport services significantly decelerated compared to the previous month and became 1.37%.
While the decline in prices of passenger transport by air and intercity passenger 3 transport by road pushed the subgroup’s monthly inflation down, carry-over effects of school bus fares from September prevented a more favorable outlook.
Annual core goods inflation dropped 0.18 percentage points to 53.1%.
Across subgroups, price increases weakened significantly in durable goods, whereas they accelerated seasonally in clothing and footwear due to the transition to the new season.
Annual inflation increased in clothing and footwear, but decreased in other subgroups.
Prices in durable goods (excluding gold) rose somewhat by 0.43%, while automobile prices declined month-on-month for the first time in the current year, and price increases in white goods and furniture lost significant momentum.
As winter loomed, prices in the clothing and footwear subgroup climbed by 14.0%, pushing annual inflation up 6.74 percentage points to 38.1%.
In other core goods, prices rose 2.50%, and annual inflation edged down 0.68 percentage points to 49.4%.
A decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation is observed.3 Seasonally adjusted monthly increases slowed both in the B and C indices in October.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.76% and 8.59% respectively in February 2022, stood at 5.94% and 5.85% in October 2023.
In October, the seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 2.79% and 3.65%, respectively.
The consumer inflation diffusion index declined in October, and its upward standard deviation from the historical average fell from 1.8 in September to 1.4.
Leading indicators suggest that the slowdown in the underlying trend of inflation continues in line with projections.
According to preliminary data, price increases are stronger in the energy group.
It is predicted that due to seasonal increase in consumption, the effect of the natural gas use above the freely-provided 25 cubic meters on measured prices will push November inflation up by 1.1 percentage points.
While the durable goods subgroup is marked by low price increases or discounts, services inflation is likely to remain stickier as anticipated.
Accordingly, imports have weakened and the foreign trade balance has displayed a relatively favorable outlook.
Recent indicators suggest that domestic demand has started to moderate as the monetary tightening is reflected on financial conditions.
In September, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the retail sales volume index decreased 0.7% on a monthly basis.
The decrease over the last two months was more pronounced in groups including computers, electronics, construction-related expenditure items (hardware, paint and glass), household appliances and furniture, which are more sensitive to financial conditions.
The annual growth of the retail sales volume index fell 3.6 percentage points to 13.8%.
Following the 5.1% rise in the second quarter, the quarterly rate of increase slowed down to 0.4%.
The upward trend in card expenditures continued in October.
In inflation adjusted terms, the rise in card 3 To identify the underlying trend of inflation, we use approaches based on “methods of exclusion”, such as the B and C indices, as well as "statistical methods" such as Median and SATRIM inflation.
Seasonally adjusted monthly changes and moving average changes of these core indicators are closely monitored to determine developments in the underlying trend.
The underlying trend can be assessed from a broader perspective, including product groups that are considered to be related to the main drivers of inflation, the distribution and diffusion of price increases across products, and the degree of co-movement of the indicators monitored.
In seasonally adjusted terms, manufacturing firms’ registered orders from the domestic market decreased in the fourth quarter.
Expected price increases were lower in November than in June for those firms that were more affected by the loss of momentum in demand.
In the fourth quarter, manufacturing firms' expectations for future export and domestic market orders increased slightly on a quarterly basis.
In September, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index decreased 0.1% month-on-month, while, adjusted for calendar effects, it increased 4.0% on an annual basis.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased 0.3% in the third quarter compared to the second quarter.
Excluding the sectors with high monthly volatility, industrial production displayed a quarterly decrease of 0.1%.
In the fourth quarter, the seasonally adjusted capacity utilization rate exhibits a limited increase.
As of September, seasonally adjusted employment recorded 31.7 million.
In this period, seasonally adjusted employment increased 0.4% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased 0.2 percentage points.
In September, unemployment rate decreased 0.1 percentage points to 9.1% from 9.2% in August.
In September, in line with the decrease in foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit fell USD 4.9 billion from the previous month’s level to USD 51.7 billion.
This fall was driven by the month-on-month decline in the cumulative gold trade deficit, the improvement in the energy balance due to the ongoing annual decline in energy prices and the moderate decrease in trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
Provisional foreign trade data for October point that seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a monthly increase.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for November, implies a limited improvement in exports and a flat course in imports as well as an annual decline.
After a decrease in September, gold imports remained flat in October- November period, but still hover above historical averages.
As of September, the annual services balance surplus increased USD 0.3 billion month-on- month to USD 51.9 billion.
Travel revenues increased USD 5.6 billion in the first nine months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 36.8 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased 13.6% year-on-year to 38.6 million in the first nine months of the year.
The upward trend in energy commodity prices that started in July, which prior to it had been declining since the second half of 2022, ended in October and prices fell again.
Non-energy commodity prices, which remained almost flat in recent months, also decreased in October.
In the first three weeks of November, the decline in prices in the energy group continued, while non-energy commodity prices remained flat.
In October, domestic producer prices rose 1.94%, while annual inflation went down by 8.05 percentage points to 39.4%.
According to main industrial groupings, prices in the energy group decreased while price increases in other groups, particularly in the non-durable consumer group, continued.
Annual inflation decreased significantly in the energy group helped by the base effect, while displayed a more limited decrease in other main groups.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index decreased and remained positive in October.
As was the case in October, exchange rates moderately increased in November.
The adjustment in the minimum wage in July 2023, accompanied by wage adjustments for civil servants and public sector workers, and wage hikes becoming broad-based had important impacts on inflation in the third quarter of the year, particularly through the cost channel.
It is evaluated that wage-driven effects are waning in the final quarter of the year.
Fuel prices can have a significant impact on consumer prices, particularly on transport services, through both production inputs and transportation costs.
In fact, the significant increase in fuel prices in the third quarter driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax arrangements have rapidly passed through to transport services prices within the same quarter.
In the following period, in tandem with the decline in fuel prices, the rate of increase in transport services prices decreased to 1.37%.
Therefore, it is evaluated that the intense cost-push pressures in the third quarter have been largely reflected on prices.
The services sector has posted strong price increases since July.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 70%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 89%.
On the other hand, the data monitored through online platforms indicate that rents in big cities continue to slow down in the recent period.
While the weakening in lagged effects of the minimum wage remains in place, the relative importance of food prices in the outlook for restaurant and hotel prices is increasing.
In October, the upward trend in catering services prices continued, while prices in accommodation services decreased.
Communication services, which are subject to price rigidities arising from contracts, have a similar effect, and price increases in this subgroup strengthened.
Based on the recent realizations consumer inflation, there is a risk that inflation will remain high in certain services items for an extended period.
The Committee assesses that inflation expectations and pricing behavior started to show signs of improvement.
The consumer inflation diffusion index, one of the indicators followed in order to monitor developments in price setting behavior, continued to decline in October as the share of items with decreasing prices rose.
The durable goods sector, which is expected to be affected more rapidly by financial conditions, stands out in this respect.
While price increases, particularly in automobiles, slowed down, discounts were also observed in certain products.
Inflation expectations decreased in November.
According to the November results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation decreased 0.78 percentage points from 68.0% to 67.2%, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 1.34 percentage points from 45.2% to 43.9%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 0.73 percentage points from 25.8% to 25.1%.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards 0.49 percentage points from 11.8% to 12.2%.
The initial impact of monetary tightening on financial indicators has become more salient, and continues to support both credit and deposit developments.
With the effect of monetary and quantitative tightening and simplification decisions, lending rates are assessed to be in line with the targeted level of financial tightness.
Average personal loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts), which have remained flat since the previous MPC meeting period, became 59.5% as of 17 November 2023.
Vehicle and housing loan rates materialized at 43.8% and 42.4%, respectively, as of 17 November 2023.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased 215 basis points to 50.3%.
As of 17 November 2023, the retail loan balance increased 126.5% in credit cards, 79.9% in vehicle loans, 37.4% in general- purpose loans, and 22.4% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 61.2% in total.
The average 4-week growth rate of retail loans since the previous MPC meeting period, which continued to lose momentum due to monetary tightening and other steps taken, stood at 2.05%.
In the same period, average 4-week growth rates of vehicle and general-purpose loans materialized at 1.39% and 1.33%, respectively.
Although personal credit cards maintained their strong trend with an average 4-week growth rate of 4.00%, its growth rate continued to slow down.
On the other hand, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans experienced an average 4-week growth rate of 2.15% in the same period.
To maintain long-term price stability, technological transformation that will improve the current account balance, strategic investments that will contribute to the continuity of supply, and exports continue to be supported.
Programs undertaken for this purpose are enhanced to include financing costs as well as access to credit, while overseeing the macro-financial balance.
The Advance Loans Against Investment Commitment (ALAIC) program, which intends to utilize long-term resources with favorable financing costs in areas that will support macro-financial stability, has been restructured in a framework that highlights the contribution to price stability, technological value and the strategic nature of investments.
Moreover, while overall credit growth has normalized, daily limits on rediscount credits for export and FX-earning services have been increased tenfold in total to TRY 3 billion.
Arrangements have also been made to ease access to credit, and a cap on discount rates applied to these credits.
Turkish lira commercial loans, which increased 0.34% across the sector in June, grew 2.38% in July, 2.26% in August, 2.52 % in September, and 2.39% in October.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira deposit rates stood at 24.9% in the week ending 18 August, at 33.5% in the week ending 15 September, at 37.9% in the week ending 13 October, and at 40.8% in the week ending 17 November.
Owing to the policy rate hike and the recent steps taken as part of the simplification of the macroprudential framework, it is evaluated that there was a growth in the demand for Turkish lira denominated assets.
Due also to the policy rate decision taken in November, the Committee evaluates that the regulations to increase the share of Turkish lira deposits and monetary tightening will continue to strengthen the transmission mechanism and to improve the funding composition of the banking system.
The improvement in external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, positive impact of demand rebalancing on current account balance, and the increase in domestic and foreign demand for Turkish lira denominated assets contribute significantly to exchange rate stability and the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on 22 May 2023 amid domestic uncertainties, decreased further to 340 basis points as of 22 November 2023, down from 417 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period.
1-month and 12- month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira declined 2.9 and 5.0 percentage points, respectively, in this MPC meeting period to 8.0% and 22.8% as of 22 November 2023.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 1.89 billion since June, USD 0.66 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.23 billion to the equity market.
Having declined from USD 128.8 billion at the end of 2022 to USD 98.5 billion at the end of May, gross international reserves of the CBRT rose to USD 134.5 billion as of 17 November 2023.
The upward trend in reserves has gained momentum recently and a significant increase of USD 8.3 billion has been recorded since the previous MPC meeting.
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 35% to 40%.
Taking into account the cumulative and lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will continue to determine the policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
The Committee assessed that the current level of monetary tightness is significantly close to the level required to establish the disinflation course.
Accordingly, the pace of monetary tightening will slow down and the tightening cycle will be completed in a short period of time.
The monetary tightness will be maintained as long as needed to ensure sustained price stability.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities, and financial stability with a holistic approach.
With the decisions 8 taken accordingly, it is assessed that significant progress has been made in the simplification process.
In addition to policy rate decisions, the Committee will continue to make quantitative tightening decisions to support the monetary policy stance.
While the policy rate, the main policy instrument, affect monetary and financial conditions and expectations, these decisions aim to stabilize excess Turkish lira liquidity and increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Indicators of inflation and underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored, and the Committee will continue to decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The Committee will continue to make its decisions in a predictable, data-driven, and transparent framework.
Committee (MPC) meeting period, consumer inflation decreased from 3.36% to 2.67% in advanced economies, while it increased from 6.08% to 6.16% in emerging economies due to the rise in Russia1.
Accordingly, inflation continues to hover above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 for advanced and emerging economies are 3.2% and 6.4%, respectively.
On the other hand, compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation declined from 3.97% to 3.76% in advanced economies and from 6.50% to 6.48% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2023 are 3.2% in the USA and 2.9% in the euro area, while core inflation expectations are 3.5% and 3.9%, respectively.
Brent crude oil prices per barrel have fluctuated in the USD 73-83 range since the previous MPC meeting while the Title Transfer Facility (TTF) price, which serves as a benchmark for European natural gas prices, has decreased.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 25.6% above the average of the previous ten years.
The index fell 29.0% from its peak level last year.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined 15.9% from its peak level last year, is 10.1% above the average of the previous ten years.
Its level continues to have an impact on inflation due to the high share of food items in consumer basket.
High levels of core inflation and inflation expectations imply that global inflation will continue to remain above the targets of central banks for some time.
Nevertheless, in their communications, central banks of advanced economies, particularly the Federal Reserve (Fed), highlighted the decline in core inflation and lowered their medium-term inflation forecasts.
As a result, expectations that rate cuts may start earlier in 2024 have strengthened, while projections for the likely course of policy rates have been revised downwards.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 172 meetings in the last 22 months, and policy rates were increased in 107 of these meetings2.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 254 meetings, and policy rates were 1 Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
As a result of the monetary policies implemented, global financial conditions have become significantly tighter, the frequency of policy rate decisions has decreased and central banks of many advanced and emerging economies have reached the end of monetary tightening process.
The Bank of Russia continued to increase policy rates as the uptrend in inflation continued.
Meanwhile, central banks of Brazil, Peru, Chile and Hungary continued with policy rate cuts on the back of the decline in consumer inflation, while the Central Bank of Colombia cut its policy rate for the first time in a long time.
Given the levels of inflation and the central banks’ policy communications, it is expected that policy rates in these economies will continue to be adjusted in line with decreasing inflation, however, the tightness of monetary policy is expected to maintained so as to ensure the disinflationary trend.
Despite the flat global growth outlook, labor markets continue to be tight.
The global growth index, which is weighted with the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, declined slightly compared to the previous MPC meeting.
The index projects a growth level of 1.6% in 2023, which is approximately 0.3 percentage points higher than its lowest level in January.
However, considering the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022, a notable slowdown in the global growth outlook, which affects Türkiye’s foreign demand, is observed on an annual basis.
On the other hand, the Global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) data posted a limited rise in November.
In November, the global manufacturing industry PMI increased 0.5 points month- on-month to 49.3, while the global services PMI increased 0.2 points to 50.6.
Thus, in November, the global composite PMI index increased 0.4 points over the previous month and reached 50.4.
The rise in the global PMI data was driven by both advanced and emerging economies.
Nevertheless, a comparison between the average values of global PMI data for the October-November period and averages of previous quarters reveals that PMI indices have declined compared to the first half of the year.
The PMI data for the services sector, which was the major driving force of global economic activity particularly in the first half of the year, significantly declined in the October-November period both in the advanced economies group and the emerging economies group.
The composite PMI indicator for the Euoro Area, one of the Türkiye’s major trading partner, decreased 0.6 points month-on- month to 47 in December and continued to hover below the threshold value.
In the Euro Area, compared to the previous month, the manufacturing PMI remained unchanged in December, while services PMI decreased 0.7 points and these indicators were recorded at 44.2 and 48.1, respectively.
On a quarterly basis, the Euro Area composite PMI declined 0.5 points quarter-on-quarter to 47 in the final quarter of the year.
This indicates that the slowdown in economic activity in the Euro Area in the third quarter continues in the last quarter of the year.
In China, the composite PMI rose 1.6 points to 51.6 in November, driven by both manufacturing and services sectors.
Meanwhile, the October-November average of the Chinese composite PMI declined 0.7 points quarter-on-quarter to 50.8.
Against this background, the slowdown in global economic activity in the third quarter is expected to continue in the last quarter and the global economy is projected to display a growth outlook similar to the third quarter.
In the August-October period (31 July-3 November 2023), due to the expectation that central banks of advanced economies will maintain their tight monetary policy stance for a longer period, the fluctuations in the global risk appetite, and the uncertainty regarding the Chinese economy, there was a total outflow of USD 54.6 billion from equity markets and USD 5.4 billion from bond markets of emerging economies.
In the following period, the US inflation decreased in two consecutive months in October and November to 3.1%, and the Fed’s communication at its December meeting led to a significant recovery in the global risk appetite.
As a result, in the five weeks between the 6th of November and the 8th of 2 December, USD 15.9 billion flowed into equity markets and USD 3.6 billion into bond markets.
The recent stabilization of the decline in the core inflation trend in advanced economies and the ongoing easing of supply-side factors, combined with the weak course of commodity prices, have led to an improvement in the global inflation outlook.
Geopolitical risks, the level of monetary tightness and the timing of interest rate cuts by central banks of advanced economies will determine the course of the global economy in the upcoming period.
Consumer prices rose 3.28% in November, and annual inflation increased 0.62 percentage points to 62.0%.
Headline inflation edged up in November and remains in line with the outlook presented in the most recent Inflation Report.
As the limit for the free use of natural gas was exceeded (first 25 cubic metres), the impact of the natural gas item on the monthly consumer inflation rose to 1.01 percentage points, which is consistent with projections.
When the effect of natural gas is excluded, the rate of increase in consumer prices declined further.
While exchange rates follow a steady course, global energy prices continue to recede from the readings at the end of September.
However, the existing level of domestic demand, stickiness in services inflation, and geopolitical risks keep inflation pressures alive.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 1.74 percentage points to 3.13 percentage points in the energy group (up by 1.39 percentage points); from 2.59 percentage points to 2.90 percentage points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (up by 0.31 percentage points); from 23.4 percentage points to 23.5 percentage points in the services group (up by 0.16 percentage points); but decreased from 17.8 percentage points to 17.0 percentage points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (down by 0.84 percentage points) and from 15.8 percentage points to 15.4 percentage points in the core goods group (down by 0.40 percentage points).
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose 2.78% in November, while annual inflation declined 4.83 percentage points to 67.2% in this group.
Seasonally adjusted data show that prices increased mildly in fruits and a decline in vegetables.
In November, price hikes were noteworthy in pulses, rice and white meat within the other unprocessed food group.
In this period, monthly price increases grew larger in the processed food group, with prices of milk and dairy products, processed meat products, fats and oils and canned vegetables coming to the fore.
Energy prices increased 9.98% in November, and annual energy inflation increased 9.58 percentage points to 21.2%.
In line with the higher consumption of natural gas, 25 cubic meters of which is offered free of charge, prices included in the basket rose further, raising energy prices.
Accordingly, the natural gas item pushed monthly headline inflation up 1.01 percentage points in November.
The contribution of natural gas to monthly inflation is projected to weaken in December.
Following the developments in crude oil prices, fuel prices fell 1.06%.
In tandem with global energy prices, the increase in solid fuel prices lost pace and stood at 1.95%, while bottled gas prices remained almost unchanged.
In November, the rise in municipal water prices was 2.90%, significantly down from the previous month.
Prices in the services group were up 2.76% in November, and the group’s annual inflation increased 1.06 percentage points to 89.7%.
Annual inflation declined in the restaurants- hotels subgroup, but increased in others, with rents in the lead.
When the rent subgroup is excluded, annual inflation proves almost unchanged.
In the rents subgroup, the monthly increase decelerated compared to October with 5.97%, while the subgroup’s annual inflation 3 went up 5.14 percentage points to 105.8%.
Fuelled by ongoing increases in mobile phone call as well as internet fees, communication services posted a monthly price increase of 5.20%, bringing annual inflation to 60.6%.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, the monthly price increase in catering services lost momentum, while the decline in accommodation prices continued.
In the other services subgroup, prices rose moderately by 1.73%, indicating an ongoing slowdown in this group.
Parallel to the fall in fuel prices, prices in transport services were relatively stable.
Annual core goods inflation dropped 0.81 percentage points to 52.2%.
Across subgroups, price increases remained limited as they did in October, while they decelerated in clothing and footwear contrary to seasonal trends.
Annual inflation receded in durable goods, but increased in other subgroups.
Prices in durable goods (excluding gold) edged up by 0.66%.
Electrical and non-electrical home appliances saw falling prices, while automobiles and furniture recorded mild price increases.
In the clothing and footwear group, prices dropped 0.38%, while annual inflation went up 1.62 percentage points to 39.7%.
Prices in other core goods rose 2.66% in line with the last two months, and annual inflation crept up by 0.72 percentage points to 50.1%.
The decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation continues3.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases slowed in November in the B, and, more notably, in the C index.
This outlook is also confirmed by the declining figures in the diffusion index, Median and SATRIM indicators.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.79% and 8.65% respectively in February 2022, stood at 3.49% and 3.61% in November 2023.
In November, the seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 2.56% and 2.57%, respectively.
The consumer inflation diffusion index declined further in November, and its upward standard deviation from the historical average fell from 1.4 in October to 0.5.
Leading indicators suggest that the underlying trend of inflation has maintained the November levels.
According to preliminary data, price increases are strong in the energy group, despite some month-on-month deceleration, which is driven by the natural gas item.
It is predicted that due to seasonal increase in consumption, the effect of the natural gas use above the freely-provided 25 cubic meters on measured prices pushed November inflation up by 1.01 percentage points, while it is estimated to decline to around 0.33 percentage points in December.
Price increases recorded a month-on-month slowdown in the processed food subgroup, while unprocessed food price increases strengthened due to developments in vegetables and red meat.
Monthly services inflation is likely to remain stickier as anticipated, while the core goods subgroup is projected to register some increase due to durable goods.
Monthly inflation will rise in January due to wage adjustments, particularly the minimum wage, and items with a high tendency for time-dependent price setting.
This rise in monthly inflation, which is also reflected in the Inflation Report forecasts, is expected to slow down in February and beyond, and hover close to the decline in the underlying trend of inflation in the first half of the year.
Recent indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to moderate as monetary tightening is reflected in financial conditions.
Accordingly, while the trend of imports weakens, the foreign trade balance displays a relatively favorable outlook.
On the other hand, discounts and campaigns, in particular, have been the factors curbing the decline in demand.
In October, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the retail sales volume index increased by 2% on a monthly basis.
The annual growth of the retail sales volume index fell 0.5 percentage points to 13.7%, while in quarterly terms, retail sales remained flat following the 0.6% rise in the third quarter.
In November, when campaigns intensified, the upward trend in card expenditures continued.
Seasonally adjusted leading indicators, on the other hand, hint at a new deceleration in the rate of increase of card expenditures in December.
Interviews with firms also imply that discount campaigns and the demand response in the said period curbed the loss of momentum in domestic sales.
Although the rebalancing that started with the monetary tightening process continues, it is evaluated that demand conditions may not weaken due to wage hikes in January.
Accordingly, the current level of demand continues to be considered as a risk factor on inflation.
In October, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index decreased 0.4% month-on-month, while, adjusted for calendar effects, it increased 1.1% on an annual basis.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell 0.7% as of October compared to the third quarter.
Excluding the sectors with high monthly volatility, industrial production posted a quarterly decrease of 0.2%.
In November, the seasonally adjusted capacity utilization rate increased 0.7 percentage points month-on-month to 77.5%.
As of October, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 31.8 million.
In this period, seasonally adjusted employment increased 0.6% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased 0.1 percentage points.
In October, unemployment rate decreased 0.5 percentage points to 8.5% from 9.0% in September.
In October, in line with the ongoing downward trend in the foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit fell USD 1 billion from the previous month’s level to USD 50.7 billion.
This fall was driven by the rise in exports, decline in the gold trade deficit, and the improvement in the energy balance due to the ongoing annual decline in energy prices, whereas foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy recorded an increase.
Provisional foreign trade data for November indicate that seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a monthly decrease, with imports registering a more pronounced decline originating from goods groups other than investment goods.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for December, implies a rise in exports and a flat course in imports as well as an annual decline.
Although imports of durable consumption goods have been stimulated by campaigns, their seasonally adjusted growth is estimated to have continued to slow down in the last quarter of the year.
Preliminary data for the last quarter point to an increase in gold exports and a continued course of gold imports above historical averages, while the improvement in gold balance continues in annualized terms.
As of October, the annual services balance surplus decreased USD 0.3 billion month-on- month to USD 51.7 billion.
On the other hand, tourism revenues, which have been strong throughout the year, continue to contribute positively to the current account balance.
Travel revenues increased by USD 5.8 billion in the first ten months of the year compared to the 5 same period of the previous year, and reached USD 42.2 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased 12.6% year-on-year to 44.1 million in the first ten months of the year.
The upward trend in energy commodity prices that started in July, prior to which had been declining since the second half of 2022, ended in October and prices started to fall again in the following period.
Non-energy commodity prices, which remained almost flat in recent months, also decreased in October before returning to their relatively flat course in November.
In the first three weeks of December, the decline in prices in the energy group continued, while non-energy commodity prices also registered some decrease.
In November, domestic producer prices rose 2.81%, while annual inflation increased 2.86 percentage points to 42.3%.
As cumulative cost increases were transmitted, industrial electricity and natural gas tariffs as well as electricity producers’ natural gas tariffs were raised by 20% in early October, the impact of which was observed on the electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply group in November.
Thus, according to main industrial groupings, the most significant increase was observed in the energy group.
In this period, annual inflation realized as -5.9 in energy group remaining in the negative territory, while it remained relatively flat course at high rates in other main groups.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index converged to its historical trend in November, while international transportation costs remained low in this period.
Global commodity prices continued to decline in November.
Exchange rates have maintained their recent mild course.
In tandem with the decline in fuel prices that started in October, transport services prices remained flat in November.
On the back of the ongoing fall in fuel prices, leading indicators suggest that the favorable course of transport services prices will continue in December.
However, the volatility in oil prices triggered by geopolitical developments remains as a potential risk factor for inflation.
Against this background, it is evaluated that the intense cost-push pressures in the third quarter have been broadly passed through to prices.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 70%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 90%.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering approximately 45% above its historical average, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector.
On the other hand, while the rise in house prices is losing pace, rents monitored through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) as well as the data for big cities monitored through online platforms indicate that the rate of increase in rents has slowed down in the recent period.
In fact, consistent with this overall picture, the price increase in rents subgroup has registered a slowdown in November.
In the recent period, catering services prices continue to be the main driver of the restaurants and hotels subgroup through food prices.
While the monthly price increase in catering services in the restaurants-hotels subgroup lost momentum in November, the fall in accommodation prices continued.
Thus, the subgroup’s inflation displayed a milder outlook compared to the previous month.
Certain services items, particularly rents, education, health, recreation and culture, exhibit pricing behavior indexed to past consumer inflation, prompting inflationary effects to persist over a long period of time.
Communication services, which are subject to price rigidities arising from contracts, have a similar effect, and price increases in this subgroup remain strong.
Based on the recent realizations of consumer inflation, there is a risk that inflation will remain high in certain services items for an extended period.
The consumer inflation diffusion index, one of the indicators followed in order to monitor developments in pricing behavior, continued to decline in November as the share of items with decreasing prices rose.
In the durable goods group, whose inflation can rapidly slow in periods of weakened effects of shocks, the diffusion index receded to its historical average.
The fall in inflation expectations continues.
According to the December results of the Survey of Market Participants, the current year-end inflation expectation decreased 1.84 percentage points from 67.2% to 65.4%, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 2.71 percentage points from 43.9% to 41.2%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 0.27 percentage points from 25.1% to 24.8%.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards 0.34 percentage points from 12.3% to 12.6%.
In addition to the level of inflation expectations, their distribution has also registered a partial improvement.
The distribution of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations points to a growing consensus around the central tendency compared to the previous month.
With the effect of monetary and quantitative tightening and simplification decisions, the current lending rates are assessed to be in line with the targeted level of financial tightness.
In the period between the previous MPC meeting when the policy rate was raised 5 percentage points and the latest MPC meeting, commercial and consumer loan rates displayed a flat outlook with a change of 0.2 and 0.92 percentage points, respectively.
During the same period, deposit rates increased by an average of 4.04 points across all maturities and by 6.1 points for up to 3-month deposits strengthening monetary transmission.
Housing loan rates, which have remained flat since the previous MPC meeting period, stood at 42%.
Vehicle loan rates dropped by 750 basis points to 32.8% driven by the end-of-year sales campaigns, whereas general purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) mildly increased to 61.7% as of 15 December 2023.
On the other hand, Turkish lira commercial loan rates remained stable at 51.8%.
As of 15 December 2023, the retail loan balance increased 141.7% in credit cards, 85.0% in vehicle loans, 41.1% in general- purpose loans, and 21.8% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 67.4% in total.
The average 4-week growth rate of retail loans, which continued to lose momentum due to monetary tightening and other steps taken, stood at 3.33%, with a slight 7 increase since the previous MPC meeting period due to end-of-year spending.
The average 4- week growth rates of vehicle and general-purpose loans materialized at 2.29% and 2.10%, respectively.
Personal credit cards recorded a higher rate of 6.26%.
On the other hand, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans and FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates recorded an average 4-week growth rate of 2.18% and 0.02%, respectively, in the same period.
Programs undertaken for this purpose have been enhanced to include financing costs as well as access to credit, while overseeing the macro- financial stability.
The Advance Loans Against Investment Commitment (ALAIC) program, which intends to utilize long-term resources with favorable financing costs in areas that will support macro-financial stability, is implemented in a framework that highlights the contribution to price stability, technological value, and the strategic nature of investments.
Moreover, while overall credit growth has normalized, the commercial loan composition is expected to be shaped in a way that will contribute to the current account balance on the back of the regulatory changes in rediscount credits for export and FX-earning services.
Turkish lira commercial loans, which increased 0.34% across the sector in June, grew 2.38% in July, 2.26% in August, 2.52 % in September, 2.39% in October, and 2.20% in November.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira deposit rates stood at 24.9% in the week ending 18 August, at 33.5% in the week ending 15 September, at 37.9% in the week ending 13 October, at 40.8% in the week ending 17 November, and at 45.8% in the week ending 15 December.
In parallel, Turkish lira deposits have started increasing while FX-protected deposits have declined.
Due also to the policy rate decision taken in December, the Committee evaluates that along with monetary tightening, the regulations to increase the share of Turkish lira deposits will continue to strengthen the transmission mechanism and to improve the funding composition of the banking system.
The notable improvement in external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, positive impact of demand rebalancing on current account balance, and the accelerated increase in domestic and foreign demand for Turkish lira denominated assets contribute significantly to exchange rate stability and the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on 22 May 2023 amid domestic uncertainties, decreased further to 284 basis points as of 20 December 2023, down from 340 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period.
While the 1-month forward exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira decreased by 0.1 point in the current MPC period, the 12-month forward exchange rate volatility increased by 1 point and reached 7.8 percent and 23.8 percent, respectively, as of December 20, 2023.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling 8 USD 4.8 billion since June, USD 2 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 2.8 billion to the equity market.
Having declined from USD 128.8 billion at the end of 2022 to USD 98.5 billion at the end of May, gross international reserves of the CBRT rose to USD 142.5 billion as of 15 December 2023.
The upward trend in reserves has gained momentum recently and a significant increase of USD 8.1 billion has been recorded since the previous MPC meeting.
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 40% to 42.5.
Taking into account the cumulative and lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will continue to determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
Assessing that monetary tightness is significantly close to the level required to establish the disinflation course, the Committee reduced the pace of monetary tightening.
The Committee anticipates to complete the tightening cycle as soon as possible.
To increase the functionality of market mechanism and strengthen macro financial stability, the Committee continues to simplify and improve the existing micro- and macroprudential framework.
With the decisions taken accordingly, it is assessed that significant progress has been made in the simplification process.
Recently, there has been excess liquidity in the market driven by the components affecting liquidity, particularly the ongoing increase in international reserves.
In addition to policy rate decisions, the Committee will continue to implement quantitative tightening by extending the sterilization tools at its disposal in order to support the monetary tightening process.
While the downward course of global inflation has come to a standstill recently, inflation remains above the long-term averages and central bank targets.
Committee (MPC) meeting period, consumer inflation increased from 2.67% to 3.12% in advanced economies and from 6.16% to 6.30% in emerging economies.1 Accordingly, inflation continues to hover above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2024 for advanced and emerging economies are 2.4% and 5.2%, respectively.
On the other hand, compared to the previous MPC meeting period, core inflation declined from 3.76% to 3.65% in advanced economies and from 6.50% to 6.48% in emerging economies.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2024 are 2.4% in the USA and 2.3% in the euro area, while the core inflation expectation is 2.3% for both the USA and the euro area.
Despite the almost flat course of commodity prices recently, geopolitical risks, financial conditions and supply-side factors cause oil prices to remain volatile.
Brent crude oil prices per barrel have fluctuated in the USD 75-82 range since the previous MPC meeting while the Title Transfer Facility (TTF) price, which serves as a benchmark for European natural gas prices, has decreased.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 20.8% above the average of the previous ten years.
The index fell 30.2% from its peak level in 2022.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined 19% from its peak level in 2022, is 8.1% above the average of the previous ten years.
However, with centrals banks drawing attention to overpricing and higher-than-expected inflation readings in January, policy rate expectations priced by markets have gone up again in the recent period, and the probability of a more cautious rate-cut path has increased.
The central banks of 12 advanced countries held a total of 178 meetings in the last 23 months, and policy 1 Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
As a result of the monetary policies implemented, global financial conditions have become significantly tighter, the frequency of policy rate-hike decisions has decreased, and central banks of many advanced and emerging economies have reached the end of monetary tightening process.
The Bank of Japan signaled an end to the negative rate policy it has pursued since 2016 while the Bank of Canada, which has kept its policy rate unchanged for the last four meetings, clearly indicated in its meeting statement that the rate- hike cycle was coming to an end.
Meanwhile, the Central Reserve Bank of Peru continued with policy rate cuts on the back of declining consumer inflation.
On the other hand, the central banks of South Africa, Indonesia, and Poland kept their policy rates constant at their January meetings.
Given the levels of inflation and the central banks’ policy communications, it is expected that policy rates in these economies will continue to be adjusted in line with decreasing inflation; however, the tightness of monetary policy is expected to be maintained so as to ensure the disinflationary trend.
The global growth index, which is weighted with the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained flat compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
The index projects a growth level of 1.7% in 2023, which is approximately 0.4 percentage points higher than its lowest level in January 2023.
However, considering the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022, a notable slowdown in Türkiye’s foreign demand outlook is observed as of last year.
Global PMI data continued to decline in the last quarter of 2023, driven by the services sector.
In this period, the global manufacturing industry PMI increased 0.1 percentage points quarter-on-quarter to 49, remaining below the threshold value.
Meanwhile, the global services PMI decreased 0.6 percentage points to 50.9.
Thus, in the final quarter of 2023, the global composite PMI index dropped 0.4 percentage points over the previous quarter to 50.5.
The fall in the global PMI data was driven by both advanced and emerging economies.
Therefore, the slowdown in global economy registered in the third quarter of 2023 is expected to continue in the last quarter and the global economy is projected to display a growth outlook similar to the third quarter.
On the other hand, despite the recent downward trend in global headline and core inflation rates, the continuation of tight monetary policies implemented to ensure a permanent decline in these rates and geopolitical risks are prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
The fall in global inflation rates in the previous MPC meeting period and the Fed’s communication at its December meeting led to a significant recovery in the global risk appetite.
As a result, in the nine weeks between the 6th of November and the 5th of January, USD 33.7 billion flowed into equity markets and USD 16.9 billion into bond markets of emerging economies.
However, following the statements from the Fed and the European Central Bank, portfolio flows to emerging economies slowed in the last two weeks (7 January- 19 January), with both bond and equity markets recorded portfolio inflows below USD 1 billion.
Recently, the course of inflation as well as the messages from the central banks of advanced economies have reinforced the probability of a more cautious rate-cut process.
Consumer prices rose 2.93% in December, and annual inflation increased 2.79 percentage points to 64.8%.
In December, headline inflation increased in line with the outlook presented in the last Inflation Report.
The price increase in natural gas reflected in the basket weakened parallel to the developments in consumption, and the impact of the natural gas item on the monthly consumer inflation was 0.29 percentage points, which is consistent with projections.
Led by unprocessed food items, the food group adversely affected headline inflation in December.
While exchange rates followed a relatively steady course, the existing level of domestic demand, stickiness in services inflation, and geopolitical risks keep inflation pressures alive.
Despite heightened geopolitical risks, global energy prices remain mild.
On the other hand, it is also noteworthy that freight charges increased in January following the geopolitical developments but this increase has not been significantly reflected in price setting yet.
As also projected in the last Inflation Report of 2023, inflation is expected to increase in January due to wage adjustments, particularly the minimum wage, developments in services items subject to time-dependent price setting, automatic tax adjustments, and increases in administered prices.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 17.0 percentage points to 18.3 percentage points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (up by 1.31 percentage points), from 3.13 percentage points to 3.90 percentage points in the energy group (up by 0.77 percentage points), from 23.5 percentage points to 24.0 percentage points in the services group (up by 0.45 percentage points), from 15.4 percentage points to 15.7 percentage points in the core goods group (up by 0.31 percentage points); but decreased from 2.90 percentage points to 2.86 percentage points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (down by 0.05 percentage points).
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose 4.81% in December, and annual inflation increased 4.85 percentage points to 72.0%.
In December, the unprocessed food subgroup was the main driver of the food group with its price increase of 7.24%.
Seasonally adjusted data showed that the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables surged, led by vegetables.
While widespread price increases were observed in other unprocessed food, eggs and red meat that was affected by the rise in carcass meat prices were among the most notable items.
Thus, red meat was the food sub-item that posted the largest price increase in 2023 with an increase of 138.5%.
The monthly price increase in the processed food subgroup remained high at 2.76%, despite having slowed parallel to the developments in prices of milk and dairy products.
In this period, price increases in processed meat products, fats and oils, and canned vegetables were noteworthy.
Energy prices increased 2.74% in December, and annual energy inflation rose 6.01 percentage points to 27.2%.
In line with the developments in natural gas consumption, prices included in the basket increased at a slower pace, and the impact of natural gas on monthly headline inflation declined from 1.01 percentage points in November to 0.29 percentage points in December.
Municipal water and solid fuel prices were up by 3.62% and 2.04% in December, respectively.
Following the developments in crude oil prices, fuel prices fell 2.20%, limiting the monthly energy inflation.
Prices in the services group were up 2.36% in December, and the group’s annual inflation increased 0.95 percentage points to 90.7%.
Annual inflation declined in transport services, but increased in other subgroups.
In the rents subgroup, the monthly increase was 4.48%, while annual inflation went up 2.77 percentage points to 108.6%.
Led by mobile phone call as well as internet fees, communication services posted a more limited monthly price increase of 3.04% compared to previous months, while the subgroup’s annual inflation rose 3.30 3 percentage points to 63.9%.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, prices increased 2.81% driven mainly by catering services, while the decline in accommodation prices continued.
In the other services subgroup, prices rose 2.23% in December, while items with the most significant price increases were cultural services, maintenance-repair of personal transport vehicles, and package tours due to the developments in pilgrimage fees.
On the back of the continued fall in fuel prices, prices in transport services were down by 2.03%, and annual inflation declined 2.96 percentage points to 92.4% in this subgroup.
Annual core goods inflation edged up by 0.57 percentage points to 52.8%.
Annual inflation rose in durable goods, but remained almost unchanged in other subgroups.
Prices in durable goods (excluding gold) recorded a stronger month-on-month uptick of 2.77%.
This rise is mainly attributable to prices of the white goods item, which soared by 7.21%, while price increases remained limited in furniture and automobiles with 2.11% and 1.25%, respectively.
Expected wage raises are considered to be the drivers of higher prices in durable goods.
Prices of other core goods rose by 3.75%, while annual inflation increased slightly by 0.28 percentage points to 50.4%.
Across this subgroup, price increases continued further, driven mainly by medicines, which surged by 14.5% due to the revision in the reference euro exchange rate.
This price hike in medicines in December is expected to have carry-over effects in January.
The decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation continued.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.75% and 8.59% respectively in February 2022, were measured at 3.56% and 3.71% in November 2023 and stood at 2.76% and 3.14% in December.
The seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 2.91% and 3.22%, respectively in December.
The downtrend in the consumer inflation diffusion index, which began in August, interrupted, and the three- month average value, which was 0.58 in the previous month, remained almost unchanged at 0.56 in December.
The trend of core indicators pointed to a more favorable inflation trend at the end of the year than projected in the last Inflation Report.
In line with projections, leading indicators point to a temporary rise in the underlying trend of inflation in January due to the minimum wage adjustment and price hikes in services items, which exhibit time-dependent pricing behavior, with administered prices in the lead.
According to the preliminary data, price increases in the energy group are stronger compared to the previous month.
This is mainly due to fuel prices, as the producer price hikes in the second half of 2023 reflected on the SCT as of January.
The impact of automatic tax increases is also visible in bottled gas prices.
In January, natural gas prices are expected to have an impact on monthly headline inflation similar to that in December.
The monthly price increase in the food group does not register a notable change compared to the previous month and remains high.
Prices in the services group are expected to rise notably due to the items that are significantly sensitive to wage developments and subgroups that have time-dependent price setting and high tendency for backward indexation.
The fact that minimum wage increases support demand may also have an impact on pricing behavior, especially in the services group.
Meanwhile, monthly core goods inflation is projected to register some increase due to durable goods.
Accordingly, monthly inflation in core inflation indicators is expected to rise in January, mainly due to services price developments that carry the risk of stickiness.
Following the expected, temporary monthly increase in inflation in January, which was also reflected in the Inflation Report forecasts, price increases are expected to slow down in February and beyond.
Recent indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to moderate in line with the projected disinflation process as monetary tightening is reflected in financial conditions.
On the other hand, discounts and campaigns in the last quarter of 2023 and wage revisions in January 2024 have been the factors curbing the decline in demand.
In November, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the retail sales volume index increased by 0.2% on a monthly basis.
The annual growth of the retail sales volume index fell 0.6 percentage points to 12.8%, while in quarterly terms, retail sales edged down following the 0.4% rise in the third quarter.
Meanwhile, card expenditures increased in the last quarter of the year, when campaigns intensified.
Interviews with firms also imply that discount campaigns and the demand response in the said period curbed the loss of momentum in domestic sales in the last quarter.
Although the rebalancing that started with the monetary tightening process continues, it is evaluated that wage revisions in January contribute to the resilience in demand.
In fact, in seasonally adjusted terms, manufacturing firms’ registered orders from the domestic market increased again in January.
In November, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index decreased 1.4% month-on-month, while, adjusted for calendar effects, it increased 0.2% on an annual basis.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 1.3% as of November compared to the third quarter.
Excluding the sectors with high monthly volatility, industrial production posted a quarterly decrease of 0.8%.
In the last quarter, the seasonally adjusted capacity utilization rate increased by 0.7 percentage points quarter-on-quarter to 77.2%.
In January, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate was realized as 76.4 % close to historical averages.
As of November, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 31.6 million.
In this period, seasonally adjusted employment increased 0.3% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased 0.2 percentage points.
After falling to 8.6% in October, unemployment rate rose to 9% in November, while posting a quarterly decline of 0.4 percentage points to 8.8%.
High-frequency data indicate that demand lost strength to a limited extent in the labor market.
In November, in line with the ongoing downward trend in the foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit fell USD 1.3 billion from the previous month’s level to USD 49.6 billion.
This fall was driven by the rise in exports, the decline in the gold trade deficit, and the improvement in the energy balance due to the ongoing annual decline in energy prices, whereas foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy recorded an increase.
Provisional foreign trade data for December indicate that seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a monthly increase.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for January, implies a rise in exports and a decline in imports.
In view of the current data, projections point that the decline in imports of consumption goods, which started in November 2023, accelerated in January 2024.
Meanwhile, gold imports hover above historical averages, while the improvement in gold trade balance continues in annualized terms.
As of November, the annual services balance surplus decreased USD 0.4 billion month-on- month to USD 51.3 billion.
Travel revenues increased by USD 5.8 billion in the first eleven months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 45.1 billion.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased 11.8% year-on-year to 47 million in the first eleven months of the year.
Energy commodity prices, which had been declining since the second half of 2022, trended upwards as of July.
This upward trend ended in October and prices started to fall again in the following period.
Having remained almost flat in recent months, non-energy commodity prices fell somewhat in December.
In the first three weeks of January, the limited price increase in the energy group were offset by the fall in prices of non-energy commodities.
In December, domestic producer prices rose 1.14%, while annual inflation increased 1.97 percentage points to 44.2%.
According to main industrial groupings, prices fell by 6.63% in the energy group, but increased further in other groups.
In this period, annual inflation realized as -1.69% in energy group remaining in the negative territory, while it was relatively flat at high rates in other main groups.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in December, while international transportation costs remained low in this period.
Driven by the energy group, global commodity prices continued to decline in December.
Exchange rates have maintained their recent trend of mild increase.
On the other hand, disruptions in the global supply chain amid geopolitical problems are noteworthy.
Prices in freight rates started to move upwards in January amid the unrest in the Red Sea.
In fact, the significant increase in fuel prices in the third quarter of 2023 driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax arrangements have rapidly passed through to transport services prices within the same quarter.
Transport services prices, which remained flat in November, declined in December in tandem with the developments in fuel prices.
On the other hand, following the minimum wage adjustment and the mainly tax-driven rise in fuel prices, leading indicators point to a surge in transport services prices in January.
Moreover, the increase in the volatility of oil prices triggered by geopolitical developments remains as a potential risk factor for inflation.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 71%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 91%.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering approximately 34% above its historical average, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector, albeit at a slightly slower pace.
On the other hand, while the rise in house prices is losing pace, micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) as well as the data for big cities monitored through online platforms indicate that the rate of increase in rents has slowed down in the recent period.
In fact, consistent with this overall picture, the monthly increase in rents has 6 registered a slowdown in December.
Leading indicators suggest that rent increases will be higher on account of the number of renewed contracts in January amid seasonal effects.
While the monthly price increase in catering services in the restaurants-hotels subgroup did not post a noticeable monthly change in December, the fall in accommodation prices continued.
Thus, the subgroup’s monthly inflation hovered around that of November.
On the other hand, prices in the restaurants-hotels group surged in January as a result of the rise in the minimum wage accompanied by the recent surge in food prices, particularly red meat.
Based on the recent realizations of consumer inflation as well as the January minimum wage and administered price developments, there is a risk that inflation will remain high for an extended period.
Certain services sectors such as education, health, insurance, and maintenance-repair are expected to stand out in this respect.
The Committee assesses that inflation expectations and pricing behavior continued to show signs of improvement.
While the consumer inflation diffusion index, one of the indicators followed in order to monitor developments in pricing behavior, displayed a relatively flat outlook prior to the minimum wage adjustment, the index is estimated to rise slightly in January.
As the impacts of the time-dependent price setting tendency, and the wage, automatic tax and administered price adjustments, which all are specific to the first month of the year, fade, the diffusion index is expected to resume its downward trend.
The medium-term inflation expectations decreased in January as well.
According to the January results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 2.14 percentage points from 41.2% to 39.1%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 1.13 percentage points from 24.8% to 23.7%, the five-year- ahead inflation expectation was revised downwards 0.58 percentage points from 12.6% to 12.0%.
Meanwhile, the current year-end inflation expectation rose 0.81 percentage points to 42.0%.
The distribution of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations points to a shift of the distribution to the left, while indicators related to the dispersion of expectations, such as the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation, remained at a similar course to the previous month.
With the effects of the monetary and quantitative tightening, and the simplification decisions, the current lending rates are assessed to be in line with the targeted level of financial tightness.
Since the previous MPC meeting period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates stood at 52.9% with a moderate increase.
Housing loan rates which have remained flat in the same period stood at 41.4%.
Vehicle loan rates increased 11.2 percentage points to 47.1% as the end-of-year sales campaigns were over, whereas general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) remained flat at 61.9% as of 19 January 2024.
As of 19 January 2024, the retail loan balance increased 1.68% in credit cards, -1.88% in vehicle loans, 0.38% in general- 7 purpose loans, and -0.40% in housing loans compared to end-2023, amounting to an increase of 0.74% in total.
The average 4-week growth rate of retail loans has increased since the previous MPC meeting period and stood at 4.83%.
The average 4-week growth rates of vehicle and general-purpose loans materialized at 3.47% and 3.26%, respectively.
Personal credit cards recorded a higher rate of 8.45%.
On the other hand, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans and FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates recorded an average 4-week growth rates of 1.76% and -0.15%, respectively, in the same period.
Programs undertaken for this purpose have been enhanced to include financing costs as well as access to credit, while overseeing the macrofinancial stability.
Turkish lira commercial loans, which increased 0.34% across the sector in June, recorded an average monthly increase of 2.35% in the following five months and grew 2.43% in December.
Turkish lira deposit rates, which had a upward course during this period, stood at 47.1% at the end of December and 45.9% in the week ending 19 January.
In line with the simplification process, the monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be strengthened in the face of any potential excess volatility in credit supply and deposit rates through macroprudential policy.
Due also to the policy rate decision taken in January, the Committee evaluates that alongwith monetary tightening, the regulations to increase the share of Turkish lira deposits will continue to strengthen the transmission mechanism and to improve the funding composition of the banking system.
External financing conditions, strengthening in foreign exchange reserves, rebalancing in current account balance, and demand for Turkish lira denominated assets continue to contribute to exchange rate stability and the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which decreased to 284 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period, increased in parallel to the deteriorating global risk appetite in January and reached 317 basis points as of 24 January 2024.
While the 1-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira increased by 0.76 percentage points, the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility decreased by 2.28 percentage points in the current MPC meeting period and reached 8.60% and 21.1%, respectively, as of 24 January 2024.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 5.33 billion since June, USD 2.37 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 2.96 billion to the equity market.
Despite maintaining their high levels compared to the previous year, the gross international reserves of the CBRT decreased compared to the previous MPC meeting period by USD 4.44 billion to USD 138.1 billion as of 19 January 2024. .
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 42.5% percent to 45%.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will continue to determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
Taking into account the lagged impact of monetary tightening, the Committee assesses that the monetary tightness required to establish the disinflation course is achieved and that this level will be maintained as long as needed.
The Committee assesses that the current level of the policy rate will be maintained until there is a significant decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation and until inflation expectations converge to the projected forecast range.
The Committee will reassess the stance of monetary policy if notable and persistent risks to inflation outlook emerge.
Recently, a temporary liquidity surplus has been observed in the market due to the impact of public expenditures and monetary base developments.
In this context, Turkish Lira Deposit Purchase Auctions continue to be organized.
The global growth outlook remains flat while labor markets continue to be tight.
In the last quarter of the previous year, the global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) continued to decline in both advanced and emerging economies (EMEs).
Accordingly, the global economic slowdown in the third quarter of the previous year continued in the last quarter as well, the global economic activity remained weak.
The global growth index, which is weighted with the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained flat following the previous .
Committee (MPC) meeting period, with a forecasted annual growth rate of 1.65% for the third quarter.
The forecasts for the fourth quarter were kept close to this level.
The PMI data improved slightly in January; however, the manufacturing industry index continued to remain below the threshold level.
Maintaining tight monetary policies to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are regarded as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
The high levels of core inflation and inflation expectations imply that global inflation will continue to remain above central banks’ targets for some time.
Nevertheless, as 2023 drew to a close, the central banks of advanced economies, particularly the Federal Reserve (Fed), highlighted the decline in core inflation and revised their medium-term inflation forecasts downwards in their communications.
However, due to both central banks’ caution on overpricing and higher-than-expected US inflation data released in January and February, market implied future policy rates have recently indicated a more cautious rate-cut path.
Meanwhile, portfolio flows to EMEs slowed down due to decline in global risk appetite.
Normalization in loan growth and composition continued.
The four-week average growth rate of retail loans has decreased since the previous MPC meeting period and stood at 2.98%.
The four- week average growth rates of vehicle and general-purpose loans materialized at -1.42% and 1.95%, respectively.
Personal credit cards recorded a relatively high rate of 5.38%.
On the other hand, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans and FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates recorded four-week average growth rates of 1.39% and 1.49%, respectively, in the same period.
With the effects of the monetary and quantitative tightening, and the simplification decisions, the current loan rates are assessed to be in line with the targeted level of financial tightness.
Turkish lira commercial loan rates, which had remained flat since the previous MPC meeting, stood at 52.9%.
Concurrently, housing loan rates and general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) were flat at 41.0% and 63.4%, respectively, as of 16 February 2024.
Meanwhile, vehicle loan rates decreased by 2.6 percentage points to 44.5%.
Turkish lira deposit rates, which increased compared to the previous MPC meeting period due to macroprudential measures to support the monetary transmission mechanism, stood at 47.0% as of February 16.
On the other hand, the spread between the interest rates offered for small savings deposits and large deposits persisted.
The impacts of these developments on the rebalancing process in domestic demand are closely monitored as a risk factor.
External financing conditions, the level of foreign exchange reserves, the improvement in current account balance, and demand for Turkish lira denominated assets continue to contribute to exchange rate stability and to the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Accordingly, despite declining by 3.88 billion USD compared to the previous MPC meeting period, the gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) stood at 134.2 billion USD as of 16 February 2024 and maintained its high level compared to the previous year.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira stood at 6.4% and 18.7%, respectively, as of 21 February 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium dropped by 23 basis points to 294 basis points amid the improved global risk appetite as of 21 February 2024.
The fall in risk premium and in exchange rate volatility were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 5.55 billion since June, USD 2.38 billion of which was directed towards government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 3.17 billion towards the equity market.
The determination in tight monetary stance will continue to contribute to the Turkish lira’s real appreciation process, which is a key element of disinflation.
Tight monetary policy, coupled with macroprudential policies that support the transmission mechanism will not only help the rebalancing of domestic demand, but also keep the demand for Turkish lira assets buoyant, contributing to the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation through real appreciation.
Recent indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to moderate.
This moderation is robust in imports of consumption goods and gold, yet slower than projected in indicators of other consumption expenditures.
In December, the retail sales volume index remained on an upward track on a monthly basis and increased slightly in quarterly terms.
Following a decline in the previous quarter, manufacturing firms’ registered orders from the domestic market increased again in the first quarter of the year amid wage adjustments.
On the other hand, firms’ three month-ahead expectations for domestic market orders decreased in this period.
After a deceleration in January, card spending accelerated again as of mid-February.
Interviews with firms imply that the level of domestic sales was sustained in the first quarter due to wage increases and additional promotions introduced by firms.
As of February, indicators suggest that moderation which started with the monetary tightening, is progressing gradually and that demand continues to be resilient.
In December, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index increased 2.4% month-on-month, and adjusted for calendar effects, it rose by 1.6% year-on-year.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 0.8%.
In January, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate was realized as 76.4% close to historical averages.
As of December, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 0.6% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.1 million.
In this period, labor force participation rate followed a flat course.
Unemployment rate posted a quarterly decline of 0.4 percentage points and stood at 8.8%.
High-frequency data indicate that labor demand has started to moderate.
In December, the annualized current account deficit fell by USD 3.9 billion month-on-month to USD 45.2 billion.
This fall was driven by the rise in exports, the substantial decline in the gold trade deficit, and the ongoing annual decline in energy prices.
Moreover, unlike November, the foreign 2 trade deficit excluding gold and energy registered a decrease.
Provisional foreign trade data for January indicate that seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a monthly decrease.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for February, implies a relatively flat trend in exports and a decline in imports.
In view of the current data, projections point that the decline in imports of consumption goods, which started in November 2023, continued in February 2024.
Meanwhile, gold imports has converged to its historical average, while the improvement in the gold trade balance continues in annualized terms.
On the other hand, as of December, the annualized services balance surplus increased by USD 0.2 billion month-on-month to USD 52 billion.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s long-term debt rollover ratio exceeded 100% in the last two months of 2023 in annualized terms and stood at 115% in December.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 100%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities appear to have improved.
In January, monthly headline inflation and the underlying trend increased as anticipated in the inflation forecast path.
Consumer prices rose 6.70% in January, and annual inflation inched up 0.09 percentage points to 64.9%.
In this period, the contribution of energy and services to annual inflation rose, while that of food, core goods and the alcohol-tobacco-gold group decreased.
Consumer inflation outlook for January was marked mainly by the significant rise in services inflation due to the wage and administered price adjustments, and backward indexation behavior.
The strong increase in unprocessed food prices also pushed headline inflation up.
Monthly inflation in the energy group was affected by the automatic lump-sum tax hikes in fuel and bottled gas prices, while the impact of natural gas on monthly consumer inflation came out at 0.23 percentage points, due to increased consumption, in line with projections.
In January, monthly core goods inflation increased compared to the previous month due to the developments on exchange rate and labor cost.
The current level of domestic demand, stickiness in services inflation, geopolitical risks, and food prices keep inflation pressures brisk.
Due to month-specific and time-dependent price and wage adjustments, the underlying trend of monthly inflation rose in January.
The seasonally adjusted monthly increases in both the B and C indices accelerated, which was confirmed by higher readings of the diffusion index, Median, SATRIM and other underlying trend indicators monitored.
While the rise in the underlying trend was mostly driven by services prices developments, core goods inflation also went up month-on- month, albeit to a relatively limited extent.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were 7.0% and 8.2%, respectively, while their three-month average increases were measured at 4.2% and 4.6%.
In January, price pressures driven by the services sector were strong, particularly in items such as transportation, rent, restaurants-hotels, health, private education, maintenance-repair, insurance and administered services, which are prone to time-dependent pricing.
Indeed, the strong backward-indexation tendency in these groups and rising labor costs led to a high monthly services inflation in January, given the labor-intensive nature of the sector.
While the cost-side effect of wage hikes is reflected to prices of both goods and services relatively more rapidly, the demand-side effect extends over time and harbors more uncertainties than cost-side effects.
In this context, the Committee will closely monitor the alignment of inflation expectations and pricing behavior with projections, and the impact of wage increases on inflation in the period ahead.
This prevalent pricing behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes core goods and services groups, was around 70% in January 2024, while annual inflation 3 in the services sector was about 90%.
Moreover, the diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 45% above its historical average in January, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector.
Accordingly, certain services sectors such as education, health, maintenance-repair, and insurance are expected to continue to stand out in this respect.
In January, domestic producer prices rose by 4.14%, while annual inflation remained flat at 44.2%.
According to main industrial groupings, energy prices receded in January but price increases gained strength in other subgroups.
Meanwhile, annual inflation declined across all subgroups, excluding intermediate goods.
Global commodity prices, having declined since October 2023, posted a moderate increase in January.
In a breakdown by subgroups, global energy prices rose in January while non-energy commodity prices maintained their almost flat course of recent months.
As of the first three weeks of February, prices have recorded a limited increase in both energy and non-energy commodities, being more pronounced in energy.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in January, while international transportation costs increased due to the geopolitical developments concerning the Red Sea.
Following the significant rise in January, global freight rates remained high in February, albeit with some decline.
Although this development has not yet had a significant impact on domestic pricing, it is considered to be a risk factor given the extension of suppliers’ delivery times since January.
The evolution of transportation costs in the following months and their possible impact on inflation are other factors to be monitored closely.
While the rate of increase in housing prices continued to decelerate, rent increases grew stronger on account of the number of renewed contracts in January amid seasonal effects.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that the rate of increase in rents will lose pace in February following the rise in January.
According to leading indicators, this slowdown is attributable to the fall in contract renewal rate as well as the weakened rate of increase in renewed rents.
The decline in medium-term inflation expectations continues.
According to the February results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 1.31 percentage points from 39.1% to 37.8%; while annual inflation expectation for the end of the next year decreased 0.24 percentage points from 25.4% to 25.2%; the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased 0.64 percentage points from 23.7% to 23.1%.
Meanwhile, the current year- end inflation expectation rose by 0.92 percentage points to 43.0%.
The five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards by 0.32 percentage points from 12.0% to 12.3%.
The distribution of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations suggests that consensus over the central tendency has increased, while indicators related to the dispersion of expectations, such as the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation, remained at a similar course to the previous month.
Leading indicators point to a slowdown in the underlying trend of inflation in February compared to January.
According to the preliminary data, price increases in the food group were stronger compared to the previous month, but slowed down in other groups, particularly in the services group.
Indicators suggest that food prices display a higher-than-anticipated course also due to Ramadan, and the repercussions of these developments are further observed in dining out services in the restaurants-hotels group.
The rapid increase in the volatility of oil prices triggered by geopolitical developments remains as a potential risk factor for inflation, particularly via the fuel prices channel.
In fact, leading indicators suggest that the rise in fuel prices remained relatively high in February as well and this outlook continued to be reflected on transport services.
While natural gas prices are not expected to have a significant impact on monthly headline inflation in February, monthly inflation in core goods is projected to weaken slightly.
The Committee has decided to keep the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) constant at 45 percent.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
The Committee has assessed that the current level of the policy rate will be maintained until there is a significant and sustained decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation and until inflation expectations converge to the projected forecast range.
The lagged effects of the monetary tightness on financial and economic conditions will be closely monitored in the upcoming period.
Monetary policy stance will be tightened in case a significant and persistent deterioration in inflation outlook is anticipated.
The Committee will continue to implement macroprudential policies in a way to preserve the functionality of the market mechanism and macro financial stability.
Accordingly, monetary transmission mechanism will be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, and on financial stability with a holistic approach.
It is assessed that significant progress has been made in the simplification process.
In the recent period, temporary excess liquidity emerged in the market due to the impact of public expenditures and monetary base developments.
Against such circumstances, in order to support the monetary tightness, developments in market liquidity will be closely monitored and sterilization tools will be effectively used whenever needed.
Indicators of inflation and underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored and the Committee will decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The global growth outlook remains subdued while labor markets continue to be tight.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained subdued following the previous .
Committee (MPC) meeting period, displaying an annual growth rate of 1.76% for the fourth quarter of 2023.
The forecast for the first quarter of 2024 is 1.85%.
Accordingly, the global economic slowdown in the third quarter of the previous year continued in the last quarter as well, and global economic activity remained weak.
On the other hand, both export weighted growth outlook and PMI figures in January and February indicate a gradual recovery in economic activity relative to last quarter of 2023.
Despite the sharp decline in inflation in 2023, stickiness of services inflation is particularly evident in many countries.
While emerging economies continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, the central banks of advanced economies are also expected to start rate cuts in 2024.
However, due to central banks’ recent communications and the higher-than-expected US inflation data for January and February, market-implied future policy rates have indicated a more cautious rate-cut path compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
Following a slowdown that began in early January, portfolio flows to EMEs have increased again in recent weeks, due to the favorable course of risk appetite.
Total loan growth has accelerated since the previous MPC meeting period.
The four-week average growth rate of retail loans has increased since the previous MPC meeting period and stood at 4.12%.
The four-week average growth rates of general-purpose loans and personal credit cards materialized at 4.59% and 5.34%, respectively.
That of vehicle loans fell by 0.59%, maintaining its weak course since the beginning of the year.
On the other hand, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans and FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates recorded four-week average growth rates of 3.34% and 1.28%, respectively, in the same period.
Financial conditions were tightened, and monetary policy transmission was reinforced with the measures taken in March.
Accordingly, the monthly growth limits for Turkish lira commercial loans and general-purpose loans were reduced to 2%, and, to enhance the effectiveness of this measure, a reserve requirement obligation was introduced in addition to the securities maintenance practice, in case growth rates exceed limits.
The maximum interest rates for credit card cash withdrawals and overdraft accounts were raised from 4.42% to 5% in line with the general-purpose loan rates.
On the other hand, in order to support Turkish lira deposits, a Turkish lira share growth target for legal entities was set, while the Turkish lira share growth targets for real persons were calibrated according to current trends and the commission rates to be applied in case of failure to 1 achieve these targets were increased.
The remuneration of reserve requirements (reserve requirement reduction for participation banks) was extended to include demand deposits and deposits with maturities up to one month for banks that meet the renewal and transition to Turkish lira targets.
The CBRT decided to keep a portion of the required reserve amount for Turkish lira liabilities, maintained as an average of a 14-day period, as blocked.
As a result of steps taken towards tightening financial conditions, Turkish lira commercial loan rates and general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 6.27 percentage points and 15.3 percentage points to 59.6% and 76.0%, respectively, since the previous MPC meeting.
Housing loan rates and vehicle loan rates, which posted a limited increase in the same period, stood at 42.7% and 43.1%, respectively, as of 15 March 2024. Credit growth rates are expected to stabilize following the policy rate decision taken in March and the macroprudential measures.
Turkish lira deposit rates, which increased by 2.81 percentage points compared to the previous MPC meeting period due to macroprudential measures to support the monetary transmission mechanism, stood at 49.6% as of 15 March.
On the other hand, the spread between the interest rates offered for small savings deposits and large deposits persists.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) declined by USD 6.31 billion compared to the previous MPC meeting period to USD 127.9 billion as of 15 March 2024.
Despite the improved global risk appetite, due to short-term domestic uncertainties, Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium increased by 43 basis points to 337 basis points as of 20 March 2024.
Similarly, the 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 8.6% and 19.5%, respectively, as of 20 March 2024.
Since June 2023, net portfolio inflows totaled USD 4.57 billion, USD 2.02 billion of which was directed towards government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 2.55 billion towards the equity market.
Meanwhile, the recent increases in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities have been accompanied by net portfolio outflows.
Economic activity remained robust in the last quarter of 2023.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data point to a fall in the contribution of private consumption to annual growth and a decline in the negative contribution of net exports during the same period.
However, on a quarterly basis, the GDP data suggest that the contribution of private consumption to growth accelerated in the last quarter of 2023, while the contribution of net exports to growth, albeit being positive, declined compared to the previous quarter.
Accordingly, discounts and campaigns in the last quarter of the year and the demand brought forward by expected wage revisions weakened the moderation in demand.
While imports of consumption goods and gold slowed down and contributed to the improvement in the current account balance, other recent indicators imply that domestic demand remains resilient.
In January, the retail sales volume index, published by TURKSTAT with updated base year and calculations, remained on an upward track on a monthly basis while the growth rate of the index gained momentum in quarterly terms.
On the other hand, the trade sales volume index decreased on a monthly basis and remained flat quarter-on-quarter.
Similarly, the sectoral turnover and services production indices for January pointed to weaker activity in the services sector.
Card spending further increased in March as well.
Interviews with firms imply that the level of domestic sales increased on a quarterly basis in the first quarter due to wage increases, 2 additional promotions introduced by firms, and the demand brought forward.
In January, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index remained flat month- on-month, while adjusted for calendar effects, it rose by 1.1% year-on-year.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased by 1.4%.
In February, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate was realized as 77%, hovering slightly above historical averages.
As of January, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 1.1% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.2 million.
In this period, labor force participation rate increased.
Unemployment rate posted a quarterly increase of 0.2 percentage points and stood at 9.1%.
Survey indicators and high- frequency data indicate that labor demand has started to moderate.
In January, the annualized current account deficit fell by USD 7.9 billion month-on-month to USD 37.5 billion.
While this fall was driven by the rise in exports, the substantial decline in the gold trade deficit, and the ongoing annual decline in energy prices, the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy continued to decrease.
Provisional foreign trade data for February indicate that seasonally adjusted exports remained flat, while imports posted a monthly increase.
The three- month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for March, implies a flat trend in exports and imports.
In view of the current data, projections point to a moderate decline in seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods in the first quarter.
Meanwhile, gold imports hover around their historical averages, while the improvement in the gold trade balance continues in annualized terms.
On the other hand, as of January, the annualized services balance surplus remained steady at USD 52 billion.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s long-term debt rollover ratio exceeded 100% in the last two months of 2023 in annualized terms and stood at 121% in January 2024.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 95%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remain strong.
In February, monthly headline inflation and the underlying trend decreased, yet remained above the projection of the Inflation Report forecast path.
Consumer prices rose by 4.53% in February, and annual inflation went up by 2.21 percentage points to 67.1%.
In this period, the contribution of services, food and energy to annual inflation rose, while that of core goods and the alcohol- tobacco-gold group decreased.
The increase in consumer inflation for February was mainly driven by services prices affected by the ongoing consequences of wages and backward-indexation behavior, as well as food prices influenced by factors specific to the month of Ramadan.
This period saw significant price hikes particularly in red meat and related processed meat products, as well as milk and dairy products, affected by the increase in the reference price of raw milk.
In addition to its direct effects, the food group continued to have a negative impact on headline inflation indirectly through catering services.
Monthly inflation in the energy group was mainly driven by the fuel item, due to the course of the Turkish lira as well as rising oil prices due to geopolitical developments, and the decisions regarding the oil production, and diminishing stock levels, while the mechanical impact of the free use of natural gas on monthly consumer inflation was quite limited at 0.01 percentage points.
Monthly core goods inflation weakened in February, with a mild increase in prices within the group, primarily in durable goods.
In the first quarter of 2024, the continuing resilient course of domestic demand eased the pass-through of cost increases into prices.
Stickiness in services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, and food prices keep inflation pressures alive.
In February, led by services inflation, the underlying trend of monthly inflation was higher than expected.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were realized as 4.3% and 4.2% respectively, weakened yet remained high compared to previous month.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 4.8% and 5.2%.
Compared to January, among the components of B index, price increases strengthened in processed food, but decelerated in core goods and services.
In this period, the diffusion index increased slightly over the previous month, while the Median, SATRIM and other underlying trend indicators declined.
In February, the services item, which remained higher than expected, although slowed down on monthly basis, posted the largest price increase across subgroups, after the food item.
Price increases spread across the services group due to the ongoing effects of the backward-indexation behavior and wage adjustments.
The Committee closely monitors the alignment of inflation expectations and pricing behavior with projections, and the impact of wage increases on inflation.
The prevalent pricing behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time.
While annual inflation was 54% in the core goods group in February, it was 40 percentage points higher at approximately 94% in the services sector.
The diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 40% above its historical average in February, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector, albeit at a somewhat weaker pace.
In this regard, based on the recent realizations of consumer inflation, there is a risk that inflation will remain high in certain services items for an extended period.
Certain services sectors such as rents, education and insurance are expected to stand out in this respect.
Annual rent inflation remains elevated.
Although leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that the slowdown in the rate of increase in rents that started in February will also continue in March, the current levels are higher than projected in the Inflation Report.
In education services, high rates of increases are observed due to private school fees.
Considering that private school fees, which are highly prone to the backward-indexation tendency and are also affected by wage developments, will be reflected to the Consumer Price Index gradually until July depending on price announcement dates, there is a risk that services inflation will be unfavorably affected by this channel in the near future.
Developments in insurance services were driven by transportation insurance, in which the rise in compulsory traffic insurance prices over the last two months was noticeable.
In February, domestic producer prices rose by 3.74%, while annual inflation went up by 3.09 percentage points to 47.3%.
According to main industrial groupings, energy prices remained flat in February but prices of the durable and non-durable consumption goods groups increased significantly.
Annual inflation was relatively flat in the capital goods item, whereas it rose in other subgroups.
Having declined since October 2023, global commodity prices assumed an upward course in January that also continued into February.
In a breakdown by subgroups, global energy prices remained on the rise in February, while non-energy commodity prices partly maintained their almost flat course of recent months.
As of the first three weeks of March, prices were increasing in both energy and non-energy commodities.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in February.
Global freight rates, which posted some decline in February, maintain their downward course in March but still remain high.
Having been extended in January, suppliers’ delivery times did not record any 4 significant change in February.
The evolution of transportation costs in the following months and their possible impact on inflation are the factors to be monitored closely.
While the decline in medium term inflation expectations continues, year-end inflation expectations for 2024 and 2025 have increased.
According to the March results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased by1.08 percentage points from 37.8% to 36.7%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation declined by 0.38 percentage points from 23.1% to 22.7%.
Meanwhile, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 1.23 percentage points to 44.2%.
Inflation expectation for the end of the next year also increased by 1.09 percentage points from 25.2% to 26.3%.
The five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised upwards by 0.51 percentage points from 12.3% to 12.8%.
The current course of inflation expectations poses an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
Leading indicators point to a slowdown in the underlying trend of inflation in March.
On the other hand, despite this slowdown, the underlying trend is considered to be slightly above the level projected in the Inflation Report.
According to the preliminary data, in March, price increases in the core goods group have been slightly stronger compared to the previous month, but have slowed down in other groups, particularly in the energy group.
Food prices, which rose significantly in the previous month also due to the Ramadan, posted a more moderate increase in this period owing to vegetable prices.
Monthly price increases in services are also expected to remain high, but weaken compared to February.
On the other hand, leading indicators point to a month-on-month increase in prices of durable goods that have high and fast exchange rate pass- through.
Thus, the March inflation outlook is affected by developments in exchange rates and commodity prices, resilient course of domestic demand, and the effects of Ramadan-specific factors (especially on red meat) carried over from the previous month, while the backward- indexation tendency continues to have repercussions and price increases continue particularly in education services.
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 45 percent to 50 percent.
The Committee has also decided to adjust the monetary policy operational framework by setting the Central Bank overnight borrowing and lending rates 300 basis points below and above the one-week repo auction rate, respectively.
In response to the deterioration in the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to raise the policy rate.
Tight monetary stance will be maintained until a significant and sustained decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation is observed, and inflation expectations converge to the projected forecast range.
Monetary policy stance will be tightened in case a significant and persistent deterioration in inflation is foreseen.
The decisiveness regarding tight monetary stance will bring down the underlying trend of monthly inflation through moderation in domestic demand, real appreciation in Turkish lira, and improvement in inflation expectations.
Consequently, disinflation will be established in the second half of 2024.
The Committee continues to implement macroprudential policies in a way to preserve the functionality of the market mechanism and macro financial stability.
Monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
Market liquidity will be closely monitored and sterilization tools will continue to be effectively used whenever needed.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will make its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
The Committee will make its decisions in a predictable, data-driven and transparent framework.
In the first quarter of the year, the global growth outlook displayed a limited improvement while labor markets continued to be tight.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is forecasted to grow by 2.1% in 2024 that is slightly higher than 1.8% recorded in 2023, and global economic activity remains weak.
On the other hand, both export weighted growth outlook and PMI figures for the first quarter indicate a gradual recovery in economic activity relative to the last quarter of 2023.
Meanwhile the US economic growth trend diverged positively from other advanced economies.
Geopolitical risks and maintaining tight monetary policies to ensure a permanent decline in inflation are regarded as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
However, due to stickiness in inflation, geopolitical developments and increased risks pertaining to commodity prices, market-implied future policy rates indicate a more cautious rate-cut path compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
Meanwhile, expectations for growth, inflation outlook and monetary policies of advanced economies have started to diverge and risk appetite and portfolio flows towards EMEs have displayed a volatile course due to increased global uncertainty.
The monetary policy decisions in March have led to a significant tightening in financial conditions.
These steps strengthened the transmission of the policy rate to deposit and loan rates.
Turkish lira deposit rates have increased by 1071 basis points since the previous MPC meeting week and reached 60.34% on 19 April 2024.
The rise in Turkish lira commercial loan rates and general- purpose loan rates (excluding Overdraft Accounts (ODA)) also exceeded the rise in policy rates, increasing by 871 and 554 basis points to 68.29% and 81.54%, respectively.
Housing loan rates increased by 229 basis points to 44.94%, while vehicle loan rates decreased by 1933 basis points to 23.76% as of 19 April 2024 owing to recent campaigns in the sector.
Meanwhile, with the increase in the maximum contractual interest rates on credit card transactions from 3.66% to 4.25% on 6 April 2024, credit card expenditures have also started to contribute to the rebalancing process in credit growth.
However, it is observed that the spread between interest rates offered for low- amount savings deposits and high-amount saving deposits, the effects of which are closely monitored and which are important for the rebalancing process in domestic demand, continued to widen.
The effects of monetary tightening on credit conditions and domestic demand are closely monitored.
Total loan growth, which has decelerated notably since the previous MPC meeting 1 period, is expected to weaken the resilient course of domestic demand with the help of monetary measures and quantitative tightening.
The average of four-week growth rate of retail loans has declined from 4.12% to 3.28% since the previous MPC meeting period.
This rate fell from 4.59% to 2.49% in general purpose loans and from 5.34% to 5.01% in personal credit cards.
Average growth rates of vehicle loans have remained in the negative territory since the previous MPC meeting period and the average four-week growth rate of vehicle loans has become -1.29%.
Turkish lira- denominated commercial loans have lost further pace and their four-week average growth rate has dropped from 3.34% to 1.64%, while the same rate in FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates has increased from 1.28% to 2.89%.
The CBRT continues to simplify macroprudential policies in a way that safeguards macro financial stability.
Accordingly, in the press release of 6 April 2024, the securities maintenance ratio applied to liabilities subject to securities maintenance was reduced from 4% to 1%, and the implementation regarding securities maintenance based on loan growth was terminated.
In addition, the CBRT shared the plan to terminate the securities maintenance practice in a short while.
On the other hand, in the press release of 25 April 2024, in order to strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism, increase the share of Turkish lira deposits, and support the transition from FX-protected deposits (KKM) to Turkish lira deposits, remuneration of the reserve requirements of eligible banks maintained for their Turkish lira deposit and KKM accounts was regulated and renumeration rate was related with policy rate.
Accordingly, the upper limit of the remuneration rate applied to the amount of required reserves that should be maintained for Turkish lira deposits based on the Turkish lira conversion rate was set at 80% of the policy rate, and was raised from 36% to 40%.
Moreover, the upper limit of the remuneration rate applied to the amount of required reserves that should be maintained for KKM accounts based on the renewal and Turkish lira conversion rate was set at 60% of the policy rate, and was raised from 25% to 30%.
Thus, by lowering the cost of Turkish lira deposits borne by the financial sector, formation of deposit rates at a higher level is targeted, which will lead to an increase in Turkish lira savings as well as the demand for Turkish lira assets of economic agents.
Specifying such rates to be applied to reserve requirements as a ratio to the policy rate is considered to enable the adjustments to become automated in tandem with the policy rate.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) increased by USD 2.44 billion compared to the previous MPC meeting period to USD 126.3 billion as of 19 April 2024.
Despite the weakened global risk appetite, Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium diverged significantly from similar emerging market CDS premiums following the MPC decision in March and declined to 310 basis points as of 24 April 2024.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira fell to 9.6%, while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility remained flat at 20.1% as of 24 April.
Since June 2023, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 5.89 billion, USD 2.27 billion of which was directed towards the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 3.62 billion towards the equity market.
While imports of consumption goods and gold contribute to the improvement in the current account balance, other recent indicators imply that domestic demand remains resilient.
In February, the retail sales volume index remained on an upward track on a monthly basis, while the growth rate of the index gained momentum in quarterly terms.
The trade sales volume index increased on a monthly basis, while its growth rate declined slightly quarter-on-quarter.
The sectoral turnover and services production indices for February pointed to a moderate quarterly increase in services sector activity.
Meanwhile, card spending further increased in the first quarter.
Although the interruption in data flow for April due to the religious holiday obscured a clear picture, high-frequency data and information from regional business contacts for this period point to some signs of moderation in the domestic demand.
In this respect, card spending in realized terms in the first half of April indicates a monthly decline.
Similarly, interviews with firms for April imply that consumption spending is losing momentum due to the demand brought forward in the previous quarter and the extended holiday.
However, the uncertainty led by calendar effects on the related indicators is taken into consideration, and demand indicators are monitored at high frequency.
In February, the industrial production index posted a strong increase of 3.2% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and 11.5% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
The high annual increase in industrial production is also attributable to the base effects stemming from the earthquake in February last year.
The high monthly increase was due to the 11.3% rise in the manufacture of capital goods, driven by the manufacture of other transport equipment, which typically exhibits high volatility.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased by 3.4% as of February.
In April, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate was realized as 77%, implying a flat course on a quarterly basis.
As of February, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 1.4% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.4 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate increased quarter-on-quarter, while the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 8.8%.
Survey indicators, on the other hand, indicate a decline in manufacturing firms' future employment expectations.
In February, the annualized current account deficit fell by USD 5.8 billion month-on-month to USD 31.8 billion.
While this fall was driven by the rise in exports, the decline in the gold trade deficit, and the ongoing annual decline in energy prices, the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy continued to decrease.
In this period, the annualized services balance surplus increased by USD 0.2 billion month-on-month to USD 52.2 billion, on the back of tourism revenues, which have been strong throughout the year.
Provisional foreign trade data pointed to a flat trend in seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods in the first quarter.
Gold imports exceeded the historical averages in March, while, in annualized terms, remained stationary at around USD 23 billion.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the provisional foreign trade data for March and high frequency data for April, implies a flat trend in exports and an increase in imports.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long-term debt rollover ratio that has been hovering above 100% since November 2023 stood at 118% in February 2024.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 93%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remain similar to the previous month.
In March, monthly headline inflation and the underlying trend decreased, yet remained above the path projected in the Inflation Report.
Consumer prices rose by 3.16% in March, and annual inflation went up by 1.43 percentage points to 68.5%.
In this period, the contribution of core goods, services, and energy to annual inflation rose, while that of food and the alcohol-tobacco- gold groups remained flat.
In March, services was the group which recorded the highest price increase.
Monthly inflation in this group decelerated but the consequences of wages and backward-indexation tendency continued, and price increases were seen across the group excluding transport services.
Monthly core goods inflation strengthened on account of exchange rate developments and pass-through from costs, which is eased by resilient domestic demand conditions.
The red meat item stood out in the food group.
Ongoing price increases in this item also affected the prices of substitute white 3 meat products, and pushed up the prices of processed meat products for which they constitute an input.
In March, the deceleration of monthly processed food inflation was noteworthy.
Monthly inflation in the energy group decelerated in line with fuel prices.
In March, the mechanical impact of the free use of natural gas on monthly consumer inflation was quite limited at 0.02 percentage points.
In March, despite an ongoing decline, the underlying trend of monthly inflation was higher than expected.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were realized as 3.5% and 3.9%, respectively, remaining high in spite of a slight weakening compared to the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 4.8% and 5.4%.
In March, among the components of the B index, price increases strengthened in core goods with respect to the previous month, but decelerated in services and particularly in processed food.
In this period, the Median, SATRIM, and other underlying trend indicators declined, while the fall in the diffusion index was more restrained.
The high level of and the stickiness in services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, and food prices keep inflationary pressures alive.
While the cost-side effect of wage hikes is reflected in prices of both goods and services relatively more rapidly, the demand-side effect extends over time and harbors relatively more uncertainties.
The prevalent price setting behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time.
While annual inflation was 56.5% in the core goods group in March, it was 40 percentage points higher at 96.5% in the services sector.
In addition, the diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 32% above its historical average in March, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector, albeit at a somewhat weaker pace.
Certain services sectors such as rents, education, and communication are expected to stand out in this respect.
While annual rent inflation remains elevated, leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that the slowdown in the rate of increase in rents that started in February will also continue in April.
On the other hand, the annual increase in house prices dropped to 58.3% in February, falling below the increase in annual consumer inflation, while the seasonally adjusted data point to a significant slowdown in the monthly increases in this item in recent months.
This development in house prices is expected to have a restraining effect on rent inflation in the coming period.
However, the forthcoming repeal of the 25% rent increase cap will be closely monitored for its impact on rent inflation.
This item, which is also affected by wage developments and highly prone to the backward-indexation tendency, will be reflected in the Consumer Price Index gradually until July, albeit to a lesser extent, depending on price announcement dates, there is a risk that services inflation will be unfavorably affected in the near future.
Communication services, led by mobile call and interest fees, posted sharp month-on-month price increases.
It is noteworthy that annual communication inflation, which has historically been on a mild course, reached 72% in March, surpassing consumer inflation.
In addition, given the ongoing surge in red meat prices, the upside risks to catering services prices remain alive.
While developments in insurance services were driven by transportation insurance, led by compulsory traffic insurance item, related price increases have been slowing down stemming from the transition into the new system.
In March, domestic producer prices rose by 3.29%, while annual inflation went up by 4.18 percentage points to 51.5%.
According to main industrial groupings, prices saw a monthly increase across all groups in March, with a more limited one in the energy group.
Annual inflation was 4 relatively flat in the non-durable consumption goods group, whereas it went upwards in other groups.
Having declined since October 2023, global commodity prices assumed an upward course in January that strengthened somewhat in March.
In a breakdown by subgroups, global energy prices maintained their upward course in March, while non-energy commodity prices, which had been almost flat in recent months, recorded a rise led by the industrial metals subgroup.
As of the first three weeks of April, price increases became more pronounced in both groups.
In this period, industrial metals continued to stand out among non-energy commodities with the rise in their prices.
Additionally, following March, international gold prices also posted a strong increase in April.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in March.
Global freight rates, which posted some decline in March, maintain their downward course in April but still remain relatively high.
Suppliers’ delivery times, which had not recorded any significant change in February, improved slightly in March.
While the decline in medium term inflation expectations continues, year-end inflation expectations for 2024 and 2025 have remained stable above the Inflation Report projections.
According to the April results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased to 35.2% from 36.7%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation declined to 22.1% from 22.7%.
Meanwhile, inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year remained unchanged at 44.2% and 26.3%, respectively.
The five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised downwards by 0.52 percentage points from 12.8% to 12.3%.
The Committee closely monitors the alignment of inflation expectations and pricing behavior with projections.
Leading indicators point to a continued slowdown in the underlying trend of inflation in April.
On the other hand, despite this slowdown, the underlying trend is slightly above the level projected in the Inflation Report.
According to the preliminary data, in April, seasonally adjusted price increases have lost pace in the core goods group compared to the previous month but remained high in the services group despite a deceleration.
An examination of sub-groups shows that price increases in durable goods that have high and fast exchange rate pass-through continue in this period although weakening.
In the services group, in addition to the prominent items of previous months, transportation prices have also posted a strong increase due to the religious holiday effect.
In the energy group, the rise in fuel prices is expected to be counterbalanced by the fall in natural gas prices reflected in the index following the seasonal decline in natural gas consumption.
The preliminary data suggest that the positive outlook in processed food is maintained in the food group, but large price increases in unprocessed food continue, albeit at a slower pace.
In April, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables have recorded a relatively mild increase led by vegetables, whereas strong hikes continue in red meat and accordingly white meat.
Meanwhile, alcohol- tobacco prices are on the rise due to the developments in tobacco products.
Thus, the April inflation outlook is shaped by the developments in commodity prices and the lagged effects of exchange rates as well as the effects of red meat price developments along with the resilient course of domestic demand, while the backward-indexation tendency continues to have repercussions and price increases in the services group continue in a broad-based manner.
Considering the lagged effects of the monetary tightening, the Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, but reiterated that it remains highly attentive to inflation risks.
The tight monetary stance will be maintained until a significant and sustained decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation is observed, and inflation expectations converge to the projected forecast range.
Monetary policy stance will be tightened in case a significant and 5 persistent deterioration in inflation is foreseen.
In this context, monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will make its policy decisions in a way that will create the monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
The first quarter growth data for advanced economies is supportive of the moderate recovery in economic activity, while leading indicators suggest that this recovery is mostly driven by the services sector.
The US economic growth trend continued to diverge positively from other advanced economies.
Despite the sharp decline in inflation in 2023, stickiness in services inflation is particularly evident in many countries.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, the central banks of advanced economies are also expected to start rate cuts in 2024.
However, due to stickiness in inflation, geopolitical developments, and increased risks pertaining to commodity prices, central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate-cuts.
Meanwhile, expectations for growth, inflation outlook, and monetary policies of advanced economies continued to diverge, and risk appetite and portfolio flows towards EMEs have displayed a volatile course due to increased global uncertainty.
While financial conditions remained significantly tight, excess liquidity in the market due to residents' and non-residents' preference for Turkish lira assets, had an impact on Turkish lira deposit rates.
Turkish lira deposit rates have decreased by 163 basis points since the week ending 26 April and stood at 58.68% as of 17 May.
In the same period, commercial loan rates decreased by 336 basis points to 63.70% due to the slowing demand for Turkish lira- denominated loans of the corporate sector.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding Overdraft Accounts (ODA)) declined by 327 basis points to 78.04%, while housing loan rates remained flat at 44.88%.
Vehicle loan rates, on the other hand, increased by 17.44 points to 43.59% with the termination of the recent campaigns and converged to the pre-campaign level as of 17 May 2024.
Turkish lira loan growth, which has decelerated notably since the March MPC meeting period, is expected to support the slowdown in domestic demand, which showed its 1 initial signs of weakening, with the help of monetary and quantitative tightening measures.
In this context, the average four-week growth rate of retail loans has declined since the week ending 26 April, falling from 3.28% to 1.44% as of 17 May.
This decline can be attributed to the significant fall in personal credit cards from 5.01% to 1.12%, despite the limited increase in general-purpose loans from 2.49% to 2.70%.
Average four week growth rate of vehicle loans have remained in negative territory, and the average four-week growth rate of vehicle loans has become -1.40%.
Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans have also remained weak, and their average four-week growth rate has been almost flat at 0.03%.
The growth in FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates have diverged from TL commercial loans and increased from 2.89% to 4.88%.
Within the scope of simplifying the macroprudential framework and enhancing the functionality of the market mechanism, the securities maintenance practice was terminated as of 9 May 2024.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) increased by USD 15.05 billion compared to the April MPC meeting period to USD 139.1 billion as of 17 May 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium declined to 263 basis points as of 22 May 2024.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 11.95%, while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility reached 22.14% as of 22 May 2024.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, the change in non-resident investors' positions has remained quite limited in the equity market, while net portfolio inflows have totalled USD 5.54 billion, almost all of which was directed towards the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market.
Recent indicators point to a slowdown in domestic demand compared to the first quarter.
Following upsurges on a monthly basis in January and February, the retail sales volume index remained flat in March, and the growth rate of the index gained momentum in quarterly terms.
The trade sales volume index was also up on a monthly and quarterly basis in the first quarter, while, the services production index pointed to a moderate quarterly increase in services sector activity.
Card spending surged in the same period.
Accordingly, the level of demand remained as a risk factor on inflation.
The high-frequency data and information from regional business contacts, for the April-May period, point to some signs of moderation in the domestic demand.
As of April, the manufacturing PMI figures indicate a slowdown in production due to the decline in new orders.
Card spending data and information on consumption expenditures from interviews with firms point to a slowdown in domestic demand in the second quarter compared to the first quarter.
In March, the industrial production index dropped by 0.3% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, yet increased by 4.3% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production increased by 3.5%.
The sharp monthly increase was driven by the hikes in typically highly-volatile items, notably the manufacture of other transport equipment.
When these items are excluded, the quarterly rate of change was 2%, which is more moderate than the change in the overall index.
As of March, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 1.7% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.4 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate increased quarter-on- quarter, while the unemployment rate was down by 0.1 points to 8.7%.
In March, the current account deficit stood at USD 4.5 billion on a monthly basis and decreased to USD 31.2 billion in annualized terms.
This fall was driven by the ongoing decline in energy imports on an annual basis and the continuing, albeit slower, decline in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
On the other hand, the gold trade deficit remained relatively flat compared to the previous month.
The TURKSTAT's revisions in tourism statistics led to an upward revision in travel revenues for the 2012-2023 period.
Thus, the strong contribution of travel revenues – the driver of services revenues – to the current account balance has become more evident in retrospect.
In March, the annualized services balance surplus remained similar to the previous month.
In April, provisional foreign trade data pointed to a flat trend in seasonally adjusted exports and a rise in imports.
Gold imports remained above the historical averages, flattening around USD 23 billion in annualized terms.
Meanwhile, consumption goods imports increased in April, limiting the improvement in the current account balance.
When the provisional foreign trade data for April is considered along with the high frequency data for May, the three- month average trends imply a relatively flat course in exports and an increase in imports.
The trend in imports of consumption goods is closely monitored, in tandem with a number of other indicators, to assess the impact of the monetary tightening on domestic demand.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long- term debt rollover stood at 123% in March 2024.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 97%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities improved compared to the previous month.
In April, consumer prices rose by 3.18%, and annual inflation went up by 1.30 percentage points to 69.80%.
In this period, the contribution of core goods, services, energy and alcohol- tobacco-gold groups to annual inflation rose, while contribution of food group decreased.
Meanwhile, in seasonally adjusted terms, the downward trend in monthly consumer inflation continued.
In April, monthly price increase in the services group remained high.
In addition to subgroups such as rents and restaurants-hotels that have recently stood out in this respect, transport services displayed a strong rise due to the holiday effect, as well.
In this period, seasonally- adjusted monthly core goods inflation decelerated due to the moderate increase in automobile prices.
In the food group, monthly price increases were driven by unprocessed food prices, while the moderate trend in processed food inflation was retained.
The rate of increase in red meat prices continued, albeit at a slower pace, and the food group, particularly meat prices, continued to have a negative impact on headline inflation not only directly but also indirectly through the catering services channel.
Meanwhile, in this period, annual food inflation fell below the headline inflation for the first time in three years.
In tobacco products, producer-driven price hikes were observed.
As for energy prices, the rise in fuel prices due to developments in TL-denominated oil prices was offset by the decline in natural gas prices due to the mechanical impact.
As a result, energy prices remained unchanged on a monthly basis.
In April, the mechanical impact of the free use of natural gas on monthly consumer inflation was -0.14 percentage points.
The underlying trend of monthly inflation registered a limited decline in April.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were realized as 3.0% and 3.2%, respectively, slightly weaker compared to the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted three- month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 3.4% and 3.6%.
Among the components of the B index, price increases in the processed food subgroup remained moderate, while there was a slowdown in core goods and services groups.
In this period, the 3 Median, SATRIM, and other underlying trend indicators as well as the diffusion index remained almost flat.
In addition to the high level of and the stickiness in the services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, volatility in commodity prices and food prices keep inflationary pressures alive.
In April, annual inflation was recorded at 57.1% in core goods and it was around 40 percentage points higher in services at 97.0%.
Moreover, in April, the diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 40% above its historical average, indicating that increases continued to spread across the sector.
Certain services sectors such as rents, communication and restaurants-hotels are expected to stand out in this respect.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that the rate of rent increases in new and renewed contracts, despite being below the current annual level in the consumer price index, remains relatively high.
On the other hand, the annual increase in house prices dropped to 52.0% in March, falling below annual consumer inflation, while the seasonally adjusted data point to a significant slowdown also in the monthly increases in this item in recent months.
However, the forthcoming repeal of the 25% rent increase cap will also be closely monitored for its impact on rent inflation.
Communication services have posted sharp month-on-month price increases, led by mobile call and internet fees.
Annual communication inflation, which has historically been on a mild course, reached 66.3% in April, close to consumer inflation.
Due to the commitment subscription mechanism in certain services items of the communication group, past cost pressures are reflected in consumer prices with a lag and also in a gradual manner depending on the rate of contract renewal.
Monthly inflation in the restaurants- hotels subgroup of services remains elevated driven by food prices, meat in particular.
On the other hand, the reversal of the ongoing substantial increases in carcass meat prices will restrain the upward pressures on catering services in the period ahead.
In April, domestic producer prices rose by 3.60%, while annual inflation went up by 4.19 percentage points to 55.7%.
According to main industrial groupings, energy, non-durable and durable consumption goods groups stood out with sharp monthly price increases.
Annual inflation rose in all groups, except for the capital goods.
Having declined since October 2023, global commodity prices assumed an upward course in January that continued into April.
Both energy and non-energy commodity prices rose in April, with the rise in industrial metal and gold prices coming to the fore in the non-energy commodity group.
As of the first three weeks of May, the increase in non-energy commodity prices decelerated, while prices in the energy group declined.
Accordingly, external price pressures have weakened somewhat.
In April, the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index decreased slightly compared to its historical trend.
Container freight indices tracked fell in April over the previous month but increased again as of the first three weeks of May.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in May, inflation expectations have declined across all horizons.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 2.0 percentage points from 35.2% to 33.2%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation 4 expectation decreased by 0.8 percentage points from 22.1% to 21.3%.
In addition, inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year, which had remained flat in the previous month, dropped in this period to 43.6% and 25.6%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation went down from 12.3% to 11.8%.
Although inflation expectations have declined across all horizons, the current levels remain above our inflation forecasts in the May Inflation Report and continue to pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
Leading indicators point to a relatively flat course in the underlying trend of inflation in May, consistent with the projections in the May Inflation Report.
Across the groups making up the B index, monthly price increases are expected to lose pace, albeit slightly, in the services and core good groups compared to the previous month.
Preliminary data suggest that the price increases in durable goods that have relatively high exchange rate pass-through have decelerated significantly as a reflection of the recent mild course in exchange rates.
Prices in the clothing and footwear subgroup are on the rise due to seasonal transition.
Monthly inflation in the services group is expected to remain elevated compared to the core goods group, despite a slowdown over the previous month.
On the other hand, monthly inflation in processed food, which had been mild for a while, has strengthened this month, while unprocessed food prices retreated, led by vegetable prices.
Moreover, the rise in red meat prices in the unprocessed food subgroup has decelerated significantly in May on the back of the fall in carcass meat prices.
As for processed food inflation that is projected to remain high on a monthly basis, the leading drivers are bread and cereals as well as meat and dairy products reflecting the price hikes in the related unprocessed food items.
The energy group will have a marked impact on consumer inflation in May.
In the energy group, despite the fall in fuel prices in tandem with dropping international crude oil prices, a high monthly increase will be seen in May due to the expiry of the free use of 25 m3 natural gas.
In fact, the mechanical effect of the expiry of this offer is estimated to push monthly consumer inflation up by 0.7 points in May.
Adjusted for this natural gas-driven effect, seasonally adjusted consumer inflation is expected to decline compared to April.
Despite the mild course of monthly inflation, annual consumer inflation will rise notably in May, which will be led by the base effect stemming from energy prices as mentioned in previous policy documents.
In fact, energy prices fell quite sharply in May 2023 on the back of the free use of natural gas.
Accordingly, annual inflation is estimated to surge in May due to the base effect in consumer prices, while annual changes in B and C indicators are expected to follow a moderate course.
Considering the recent developments in credit growth and deposits, additional steps were taken to preserve the macro financial stability and to support the monetary transmission mechanism.
The excess liquidity stemming from the surging domestic and foreign demand 5 for Turkish lira financial assets was decided to be sterilized through additional measures.
Accordingly, reserve requirement ratios for Turkish lira deposits and FX-protected deposits (KKM accounts) were raised, withdrawing approximately 550 billion TL of liquidity from the system.
Moreover, in order to ensure a faster decline in KKM accounts, changes were made regarding the remuneration and commission practices for reserve requirements.
Lastly, taking into account the acceleration in foreign currency loan growth, a monthly growth limit of 2% has been introduced for foreign currency loans, and it was decided to block Turkish lira required reserves amounting to loans exceeding the limit for one year.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will make its policy decisions so as to create the monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is forecasted to grow by 2.0% in 2024.
That is slightly higher than the 1.8% growth recorded in 2023, and global economic activity remains weak.
The first quarter growth data for advanced economies is supportive of the moderate recovery in economic activity while leading indicators suggest that this recovery is mostly driven by the services sector.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, the central banks of some advanced economies also started to cut rates.
However, due to stickiness in inflation, geopolitical developments, and ongoing risks pertaining to commodity prices, central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate-cuts.
Excess liquidity in the market due to residents' and non-residents' preference for Turkish lira assets was mostly replaced by a liquidity deficit after May 24, with the imposed increase in required reserves.
However, during this period, liquidity developments and the significant decline in interest rates in accounts switching from FX-Protected Deposit Accounts to Turkish lira deposits had an impact on Turkish lira deposit interests.
Turkish lira deposit rates have decreased by 191 basis points since the week ending 24 May and stood at 56.15% as of 21 June.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased by 43 basis points to 63.13%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding Overdraft Accounts) declined by 44 basis points to 76.50%, while housing loan rates remained flat at 44.58%.
Vehicle loan rates, on the other hand, increased by 21.41 percentage points to 55.31% as of 21 June 2024 due to the recent decline in promotional sales.
On the back of monetary and quantitative tightening measures, Turkish lira loan growth continued to decelerate while FX loan growth declined.
In this context, the average four-week growth rate of retail loans has increased since the week ending 17 May from 1.44% to 2.91% as of 21 June.
This increase mainly stemmed from the rise in the growth rates of general-purpose loans from 2.70% to 3.48%, and personal credit cards from 1.12% to 3.36%.
As of 21 June, the average four-week growth rates of housing and vehicle loans were 0.41% and 1.18%, respectively.
Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 1.01%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates declined from 4.88% to 4.13% due to the restrictions introduced.
The simplification steps regarding the macroprudential framework continued with the termination of the practice of maintaining additional required reserves based on leverage ratio on 28 June 2024.
Additionally, in order to enhance the functionality of the market mechanism, the maximum fees chargeable by banks upon prepayment of commercial loans were amended.
The amendment aims at robust commercial loan price formation, where the early payment fee determination method becomes sensitive to the level of loan interest and the remaining maturity.
Thus, the transmission of expectations regarding the disinflation process to long-term commercial loan interest rates is supported.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) increased by USD 5.38 billion compared to the previous MPC meeting week to USD 147.6 billion as of 21 June 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 279 basis points on 26 June 2024, slightly up from the previous MPC meeting week.
The one- month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 14.52%, while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility reached 24.25% as of 26 June 2024.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.33 billion, accounting for USD 3.03 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 1.69 billion of outflows from equity markets.
In the first quarter of 2024, economic activity remained robust.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data suggest that despite a decline, the annual contribution of private consumption to growth remains high.
On the other hand, net exports made a positive contribution to annual growth for the first time since the third quarter of 2022.
On a quarterly basis, the growth of private consumption decelerated somewhat while the positive contribution of net exports to growth increased over the previous quarter.
Accordingly, in the first quarter of the year, domestic demand remained resilient due to wage increases, additional promotions introduced by firms, and the demand brought forward, while the contribution of net exports came out positive in both annual and quarterly terms.
Thus, a more balanced demand outlook was observed in terms of growth composition.
Recent indicators confirm that domestic demand, albeit still at inflationary levels, continues to slow down.
In April, the retail sales volume index fell on a monthly and quarterly basis.
During the same period, the trade sales volume index posted a sharper decline.
Trade of motor vehicles and wholesale trade, other two main components of the index along with retail trade, also decreased.
Services production index, which recorded a moderate increase in the first quarter, fell on a monthly basis in April.
As of June, survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that domestic market orders decreased on a quarterly basis.
Information on consumption expenditures from interviews with firms also point to a slowdown in domestic demand in the second quarter compared to the first quarter.
On the other hand, two religious holidays and the associated bridge days due to administrative leaves in the second 2 quarter obscured a clear picture regarding the extent of the slowdown in demand.
Card spending decreased in April, but when the May-June period is included, it continued to increase on a quarterly basis, albeit at a slower pace.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods fell in May, but still hovered above the average of the previous year and the first quarter of 2024.
Accordingly, an overall analysis of consumption indicators along with the more recent data indicate that demand may not be slowing down to the extent envisaged in the Inflation Report.
In April, the industrial production index dropped by 4.9% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects and by 0.7% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production decreased by 4.2%.
Due to the extension of the Eid al-Fitr holiday by an administrative decision in April, the resulting bridge days have also been influential in the monthly decline.
Furthermore, the typically highly-volatile sectors experienced compensatory declines in their production which rose sharply in the preceding months, and this also pushed industrial production down on a monthly basis.
When these effects are excluded, the underlying trend of industrial production is stronger than the overall index would suggest.
In June, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate decreased by 0.4 percentage points month-on-month to 76.2%.
As of April, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 0.5% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.6 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate edged up, while the unemployment rate came down by 0.2 points to 8.5%.
In April, the current account deficit stood at USD 5.3 billion on a monthly basis and increased slightly to USD 31.5 billion in annualized terms.
This was driven by the rise in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
On the other hand, the energy trade deficit continued to improve, albeit at a slower pace.
Meanwhile, the gold trade deficit remained relatively flat compared to the previous month.
During this period, the annualized services balance surplus edged down month-on-month.
In May, provisional foreign trade data pointed to an increase in exports and a decline in imports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
Gold imports remained above the historical averages in May, dropping to around USD 22 billion in annualized terms.
The consumption goods imports, which increased in April due to calendar effects resulting from the holiday season, decreased in May.
When the provisional foreign trade data for May is considered along with the high frequency data for June, the three-month average trends imply a relatively flat course in exports and a decrease in imports.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long- term debt rollover stood at 125% in April.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities followed a similar pattern as in the previous month.
Consumer prices rose by 3.37% in May, driving annual inflation up by 5.65 percentage points to 75.45%.
Despite the base effect-driven marked increase in annual consumer inflation, annual changes in core indicators B and C followed a milder course compared to the headline index in this period.
The expiry of the free use of the 25 cubic meters of natural gas for households pushed the headline inflation up by 0.64 percentage points in May, and when adjusted for this effect, monthly consumer inflation displayed a limited improvement.
In May, monthly price increases in the services group remained high, mainly driven by the rents, restaurants-hotels and education items.
Monthly inflation in core goods rose in clothing and footwear due to the launch of the new season, but slowed down in durable goods in May.
Monthly price increases in the food group weakened on the back of receding prices in the unprocessed food group, with vegetables in the lead.
Meanwhile, monthly inflation in the processed food group strengthened due to accumulated cost pressures especially in bread and cereals as well as milk and dairy products, while price hikes in red meat continued to be reflected in processed meat products in this period.
Despite the declines in fuel and bottled gas prices following the developments in international energy prices, energy prices soared (by 4.91%) in May due to expiry of the free use of the 25 cubic meters of natural gas.
The decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation registered a temporary pause in May.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were realized as 3.2% and 3.4%, respectively, slightly up compared to the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 3.2% and 3.4%, respectively, slightly down compared to the previous month, and continued to weaken.
Among the components of the B index, price increases in May remained almost flat in core goods and services, but rose in processed food.
In this period, the Median, SATRIM, and other underlying trend indicators as well as the diffusion index also posted limited increases.
In addition to the high level of and the stickiness in services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, and food prices keep inflationary pressures alive.
In May, annual inflation was recorded at 56.5% in core goods, and it was around 40 percentage points higher in services at 95.9%.
Moreover, in May, the diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 40% above its historical average, indicating that increases continued to spread across the sector.
In May, rents, restaurants-hotels, and education stood out with price increases.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that the rate of rent increases in new and renewed contracts, despite being below the current annual level in the rent item in the consumer price index, remains relatively high.
Moreover, indicators suggest that the monthly rate of rent increases will pick up slightly in June due to the expected rise in the contract renewal rate.
On the other hand, the annual increase in house prices continued to decline in real terms, dropping to 48.4% in April, while the seasonally adjusted data point to a significant slowdown in monthly increases in this item in recent months.
Rent inflation is expected to remain high in the short term and will be the main group that will restrain the anticipated slowdown in consumer inflation.
The high course of monthly inflation in the restaurants-hotels subgroup continued in May due to restaurant services.
Although cost pressures have waned in recent months, the ongoing strong course of catering services has limited the slowdown in consumer inflation.
Education was another services item that stood out with price hikes in May due to private school fees.
Having a high tendency for backward indexation and being affected by wage developments, the effect of private school fees on consumer inflation may lose strength gradually in the summer depending on the announcement dates.
On the other hand, it 4 should be noted that education services inflation will be affected by price adjustments stemming from private university tuitions in September.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.96% in May, and annual inflation increased by 2.02 percentage points to 57.68%.
Following the mild course of the Turkish lira, monthly increase in producer prices weakened significantly, while annual producer inflation grew higher also due to the low base.
According to the main industrial groupings, energy prices stood out with a surge of 3.32% driven mainly by natural gas and municipal water producer prices, while monthly price increases were more moderate in the remaining groups, with intermediate goods and capital goods in the lead.
The upward course that started in international commodity prices in January posted a slight decline in May after the level recorded in April.
Global energy prices receded, while non- energy commodity prices went up in May.
As of the first three weeks of June, commodity prices dropped further due mostly to non-energy commodities.
Having strengthened in the first four months, pressures led by external prices weakened to a limited extent in the last two months.
Global Supply Chain Pressure Index hovered close to its historical averages in May.
Global freight indices have recently displayed a diverging outlook.
Container indices for the globe and China posted an increase after April, while dry cargo transport indices have been on a relatively mild track.
In May, lead times of domestic suppliers grew slightly longer compared to the previous month.
The manufacturing industry PMI data decelerated both in input and final product price indices, implying alleviated inflationary pressures.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in June, inflation expectations have declined across all horizons.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.4 percentage points from 33.2% to 31.8%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.0 percentage point from 21.3% to 20.3%.
Inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year edged down by 0.1 percentage points to 43.5% and 25.5%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation decreased from 11.8% to 11.6%.
Although inflation expectations have declined across all horizons, the current levels continue to pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
Leading indicators point to a slowdown in the underlying trend of inflation in June, consistent with the projections in the May Inflation Report.
Across the groups making up the B index, monthly price increases are expected to lose pace in the services and more evidently in the core goods groups compared to the previous month.
Price increases in the food group are envisaged to decelerate somewhat in June.
In the processed food subgroup, the bread and cereals item stand out with its price hike.
In unprocessed food, the ongoing rise in red meat prices has been replaced by a decline.
Preliminary data suggest that prices of durable goods have remained mild in June, driven by the fall in prices in the automobile sector.
Price increases continue in other durables.
Services inflation also remains elevated.
In this group, it is notable that prices in the rents and restaurants-hotels subgroups have maintained their upward course, while price increases have also become pronounced in transport services in this period due to the religious holiday.
Meanwhile, the price increase in the energy group has weakened compared to the previous month.
Municipal water tariffs have risen in this period, whereas fuel prices that have declined following the fall in international crude oil prices limit the rise in the energy group.
Consequently, disinflation will be established in the second half of the year.
In case of unanticipated developments in credit and deposit markets, monetary transmission mechanism will be supported via additional macroprudential measures.
Liquidity conditions are closely monitored.
Sterilization will be implemented effectively by also enriching the toolset whenever needed.
Indicators of inflation and underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored, and the Committee will decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The limited improvement in the global growth outlook continued in the second quarter of the year, while tightness in labor markets began to ease and the normalization trend seen in the supply-demand balance continued.
The cautious pace of interest rate cuts to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
Global inflation continues to decline, and the latest inflation data from the US indicate that price rigidity in the services sector has begun to weaken.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, the central banks of some advanced economies also began to cut rates.
Even though the ongoing improvement in the inflation outlook and the recent developments regarding services inflation strengthen expectations for rate cuts, central banks of advanced economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate-cuts.
Meanwhile, risk appetite and portfolio flows towards EMEs display a volatile course due to global uncertainties.
Excess liquidity in the market due to residents' and non-residents' preference for Turkish lira assets was sterilized in May through notable increases in the reserve requirement ratios for FX-protected deposit accounts, and deposit and participation fund accounts, thus restraining the decline in interest rates on deposits.
Turkish lira deposit rates have declined by 20 basis points since the week ending 28 June and stood at 56.16% as of 12 July.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates decreased by 31 basis points to 60.76%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding Overdraft Accounts) increased by 334 basis points to 77.90%, while housing loan rates remained flat at 44.24%.
Vehicle loan interest rates, largely shaped by the ongoing sales campaigns, rose to 54.07% as of 12 July.
Based on loan growth and its composition, additional measures were taken for FX loans to support the macro financial stability and the monetary transmission mechanism.
The regulation for Turkish lira loans was kept constant.
Accordingly, the monthly growth limit for FX loans was lowered from 2% to 1.5%, while the monthly growth limit for Turkish lira loans was kept unchanged at 2%.
Moreover, the scope of the exemption for investment loans 1 was expanded, and it was decided to exempt investment loans extended in the scope of the funding provided by international development finance institutions from the growth limits for Turkish lira and foreign currency loans.
On the back of monetary and quantitative tightening measures, the slowdown in Turkish lira loan growth, which had been observed for some time, continued, while the decline in FX loan growth deepened.
Accordingly, the average four-week growth rate of retail loans has decreased since the week ending 21 June from 2.91% to 1.68% as of 12 July, that is calculated from the week of the last MPC meeting.
Mainly, the fall in the corresponding growth rate of personal credit card balances contributed to this decline.
In the same period, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 1.46%.
In this period, the average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates declined from 4.13% to 1.61% due to the restrictions introduced.
To support the monetary transmission mechanism, the CBRT has taken policy measures to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-Protected Deposit Accounts.
Accordingly, as of 22 July, the minimum interest rate for new and renewed FX-Protected Deposit Accounts, was reduced from 80% to 70% of the policy rate and extra returns provided by banks were revoked.
Additionally, the scope of YUVAM accounts was narrowed to cover only foreign currency transferred from abroad, the extra returns paid to these accounts by the CBRT were reduced and bank commissions were terminated.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) increased by USD 10.89 billion compared to the previous MPC meeting week to USD 153.8 billion as of 12 July 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 259 basis points on 22 July 2024, down by approximately 20 basis points from the previous MPC meeting week.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira declined to 10.63%, and the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility fell to 23.81% as of 22 July 2024.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.57 billion, accounting for USD 1.70 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 129 million of outflows from equity markets.
In May, the retail sales volume index fell on both monthly and quarterly basis.
Trade of motor vehicles and wholesale trade, the other two main components of the index along with retail trade, also decreased.
Services production index, which had recorded a moderate increase in the first quarter, points to a slight fall on a quarterly basis as of May.
In the second quarter, survey data for manufacturing firms indicate a quarterly decline in domestic market orders.
Information on consumption expenditures from interviews with firms also pointed to a slowdown in domestic demand.
On the other hand, two religious holidays and the associated bridge days due to administrative leaves in the second quarter obscured a clear picture regarding the extent of the slowdown in demand.
In the second quarter, card spending continued to increase on a quarterly basis, albeit at a slower pace.
Despite posting a limited monthly decline, card spending in the first week of July implies an almost flat course in quarterly terms.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods fell in June, but still hovered above the average of the previous year.
In May, the industrial production index increased by 1.7% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, but decreased slightly year-on-year when adjusted for 2 calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 3.4%.
The bridge days associated with the administrative extension of the Eid al-Fitr holiday contributed to the decline of production in April, while the compensatory increase seen in May remained limited.
When the typically highly-volatile sectors are excluded, the decline in industrial production in the second quarter is assessed to be less pronounced than the overall index suggests.
Leading indicators point to a slight decline in the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate in July.
As of May, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 0.9% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.8 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up by 0.3 percentage points, while the unemployment rate came down by 0.3 percentage points to 8.4%.
Against this background, main labor force indicators suggest that the labor market remained strong in the second quarter.
In May, the current account deficit stood at USD 1.2 billion on a monthly basis and decreased by USD 6.5 billion to USD 25.2 billion in annualized terms.
The decline was mostly driven by the fall in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
On the other hand, the improvement in the energy trade deficit was limited, and the gold trade deficit narrowed compared to the previous month.
During this period, the annualized services balance surplus recorded a month-on-month increase.
In June, provisional foreign trade data pointed to a decrease in exports and an increase in imports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
Accordingly, on an annualized basis, the current account balance is projected to slightly deteriorate in June, while the improvement in the current account balance is expected to resume in the following summer period when travel revenues are high.
Gold imports approached their historical averages in June, dropping to around USD 21 billion in annualized terms.
Having decreased both in May and June, the consumption goods imports remain elevated in seasonally adjusted terms.
When the provisional foreign trade data for June is considered along with the high frequency data for July, the three-month average trends imply a decline in both exports and imports, with a milder fall in exports.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long-term debt rollover ratio stood at 128% in May.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities appear to have improved somewhat over the previous month.
Consumer prices rose by 1.64% in June, and annual inflation fell by 3.85 percentage points to 71.60%.
Annual changes in the core indicators B and C declined to 70.4% and 71.4%, respectively.
In this period, the contribution to inflation of all groups dropped, led by core goods.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, monthly consumer inflation decelerated significantly.
In June, monthly price increases in the services group followed a relatively high course, albeit with some deceleration compared to the previous month.
In this group, price increases weakened in rents and restaurants-hotels, yet strengthened in transport and communication services.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the price increase in core goods remained limited, which was driven by the durable goods subgroup (excluding gold), whose prices fell for the first time since August 2021 due to the mild course of the exchange rate and domestic demand developments.
Automobile prices dropped in this period, due also to destocking 3 campaigns in advance of the general safety regulation (GSR 2) for vehicles that was put into effect on 7 July.
Meanwhile, the monthly price increase in the food group stood close that in the previous month.
In the unprocessed food subgroup, fresh fruits and vegetables recorded surging prices, while the ongoing price hikes in red meat were replaced by a decline, and similarly, prices of chicken meat decreased in this period.
In the processed food subgroup, the bread and cereals item stood out amid the hike in bread prices.
Despite falling prices in fuel and bottled gas, energy prices went up in June due to the uptick in municipal water prices.
The underlying trend of monthly inflation registered a notable decline in June.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices registered a notable slowdown to 2.2% and 1.8%, respectively, compared to the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 2.7% and 2.6%, respectively, and receded further.
In this period, the deceleration spread across the groups making up the B index, and became more apparent in the core goods group.
Similarly, the Median, SATRIM, the diffusion index and other underlying trend indicators also posted a month-on-month slowdown.
In June, annual inflation was recorded at 50.6% in core goods, and it was around 45 percentage points higher in services at 95.3%.
Moreover, the diffusion index for the services sector indicated that increases continued to spread across the sector.
In this regard, based on the recent realizations of consumer inflation, there is a risk that inflation will remain high in certain services items for an extended period, with rents in the lead.
In June, prices were noticeable in communication services as well as the transport services driven by the Eid al-Adha.
In this period, although having slowed down compared to previous months, increase in rents remained high.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that monthly rent inflation will rise due also to the higher rate of renewed contracts in July.
On the other hand, both the rate of rent increases in new and renewed contracts and rental rates monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual level in the rent item in the consumer price index (CPI).
This implies that annual rent inflation in the CPI will lose pace in the period ahead.
However, the high inertia in this item is considered to cause rent inflation to remain high and continue to shape the course of consumer inflation in the disinflation period, though at a declining rate.
Transport services recorded a high monthly price increase in June also due to the Eid al-Adha.
Communication services posted a stronger month-on-month price hike due to mobile phone and internet fees as well as postal services.
Moreover, education was another services item that stood out due to revisions in private school fees.
On the other hand, it should be noted that education services inflation will be affected by price adjustments stemming from private university tuitions in September.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.38% in June, and annual inflation dropped by 7.59 percentage points to 50.09% also due to the low base effect.
According to the Main Industrial Groupings (MIGs), energy prices stood out with an increase of 2.22%, while monthly price increases in the rest of the groups remained moderate, with intermediate goods in the lead.
Having started in late April, the fall in international commodity prices continued in June.
Across subgroups, global energy prices remained almost unchanged, while non-energy commodity prices declined.
As of the first three weeks of July, commodity prices diverged across subgroups, yet remained flat in sum.
Global energy prices increased, while non-energy commodity prices continued to fall in this period.
It was noticeable that Brent crude oil prices, which averaged USD 82.6 in June, climbed to USD 87 approximately in the first three weeks of July.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index hovered close to its historical average in June.
The slightly extended lead times of domestic suppliers in May tended to normalize in June.
Exchange rate-driven pressures eased significantly due to the ongoing mild course of the basket exchange rate.
In June, the manufacturing industry PMI data decelerated both in input and final product price indices, indicating alleviated inflationary pressures.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in July, inflation expectations have continued to decline across all horizons.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.8 percentage points from 31.8% to 30.0%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.0 percentage point from 20.3% to 19.3%.
Inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year also edged down by 0.5 and 0.1 percentage points to 43.0% and 25.4%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.5%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of firms declined from 56.2% in June to 55.0% in July, showing a limited improvement.
On the other hand, in the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of households appear to have increased slightly from 71.49% to 71.98%.
Leading indicators suggest that monthly inflation will rise temporarily in July due to adjustments in administered prices and taxes as well as supply-side factors in unprocessed food prices, which are relatively beyond the control of monetary policy.
However, the rise in the underlying inflation is expected to be relatively limited.
Energy prices are envisaged to rise significantly in July due to the increase in residential electricity tariffs, the special consumption tax (SCT) revision in fuel and bottled gas prices, and the rise in municipal water prices.
Increased electricity prices for businesses are expected to have a negative impact on services prices through the cost channel in July and the upcoming months.
The prices of transport services are on an upward track due to rising fuel prices.
The prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group increased following the automatic hike in taxes, while producer-driven price increases in alcoholic beverages were also recorded.
The course of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverage prices also adversely affects the restaurants-hotels group through the beverage services channel.
Moreover, the partial reflection of the tax-induced effect in the final prices of tobacco products is expected to carry some of the need for an increase over the following month.
In the food group, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables increased significantly in July due to temperatures above seasonal norms, while prices of food excluding fresh fruits and vegetables followed a milder course.
Leading indicators suggest that the recent mild course of exchange rates and domestic demand developments have resulted in moderate price increases in core goods when compared to other groups.
In sum, leading indicators suggest that energy, unprocessed food, alcohol-tobacco groups were the main drivers of monthly consumer inflation in July, while core indicators excluding these groups saw a relatively limited rise.
Consequently, the disinflation process will gain strength.
In case of unanticipated developments in credit and deposit markets, monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported via additional macroprudential measures.
Liquidity conditions are assessed with respect to prospective developments and closely monitored.
In this context, in addition to the existing sterilization tools, swap tenders of gold and foreign currency against Turkish lira were announced as a facility to sterilize Turkish lira in exchange for gold and foreign currency.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will make its policy decisions so as to create the monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the five percent inflation target in the medium term.
The Committee will make its decisions in a predictable, data-driven, and transparent framework.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, an additional number of central banks of advanced economies began to cut rates.
On the other hand, risk appetite weakened and portfolio outflows from EMEs’ equity markets were observed due to global uncertainties and the volatility in financial markets in August.
The fall in inflation and exchange rate expectations as well as temporal excess liquidity in the market, driven by residents' and non-residents' preference for Turkish lira assets, continues to play a determining role in deposit interest rates.
Turkish lira deposit rates have declined by 55 basis points since the week ending July 26 and stood at 55.20% as of August 9.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 67 basis points to 58.57%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 26 basis points to 74.59%, while housing loan rates remained flat at 43.48%.
Vehicle loan interest rates, which have followed a fluctuating course in the recent period due to sales campaigns, were 55.06% as of August 9.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans has increased since the week ending July 26 from 1.68% to 2.27% as of August 9.
This increase was driven by the rise in the growth rate of personal credit card balances.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 0.21%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates stood at 1.95% due to the 1 growth restrictions, despite having continued to be stronger than Turkish lira commercial loan growth.
Policy measures taken to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-protected deposit accounts (KKM) have led to a rapid decline in these accounts and accordingly, the demand for Turkish lira deposits continues.
On the other hand, FX deposits posted a limited increase amid the fall in KKM renewals.
Excess liquidity is sterilized using reserve requirements and the toolset that was expanded in the last MPC meeting period.
Accordingly, the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) began holding additional Turkish lira deposit buying auctions on the days and times deemed necessary.
Moreover, FX swap auctions against the Turkish lira were conducted on August 2 and 13.
Finally, the CBRT started to enter quotations in the Takasbank money market in order to conduct overnight borrowing transactions with banks and non-bank financial institutions via quotation in other money markets.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 2.22 billion compared to the previous MPC meeting week to USD 150.23 billion as of August 9, 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 266 basis points on August 19, 2024, posting a slight rise due also to the volatility in global financial markets during the latest MPC meeting period.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira declined to 10.60%, and the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility fell to 22.0% as of August 19.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 0.60 billion, comprising USD 1.22 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 0.62 billion of outflows from equity markets.
Indicators for the third quarter suggest that domestic demand continues to slow down with a diminishing inflationary impact.
In June, the retail sales volume index increased monthly, but posted a slight decrease on a quarterly basis.
During the same period, the trade sales volume index posted a sharper decline quarter-on-quarter.
Services production index, which had recorded a moderate increase in the first quarter, declined somewhat in the second quarter.
Available data for the third quarter suggest continuation of the slowdown in domestic demand.
In July, card spending posted a limited monthly decline, while flattening in quarterly terms.
Meanwhile, seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods declined further and converged to their previous year averages.
In July, survey data for manufacturing firms indicate a quarterly decline in domestic market orders.
Information on consumption expenditures from interviews with firms confirm the slowdown in domestic demand.
In June, the industrial production index decreased by 2.1% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and declined by 4.7% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 3.9%.
The sector-wide decline in production is attributed to the bridge days in June, associated with the administrative extension of the religious holiday.
Excluding this effect, the underlying trend of industrial production in June is estimated to have been stronger than the overall index suggested.
Available data for the second quarter suggest that the annual and quarterly growth rates of gross domestic product will decline compared to the first quarter.
However, excluding the temporary weakening due to the bridge days, it is assessed that the decline has been milder and the underlying trend of economic activity has been more moderate in the second quarter.
Leading indicators point to a slight decline in the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate in August.
As of June, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 0.6% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.7 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up by 0.3 percentage points, while the unemployment rate remained flat at 8.8% in quarterly terms.
Survey indicators, indicate a decline in manufacturing firms' future employment expectations.
In June, the current account balance ran a monthly surplus of USD 407 million, whereas the annualized current account deficit widened by USD 0.4 billion to USD 24.8 billion.
The widening was mostly driven by the rise in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
On the other hand, the energy trade deficit remained relatively flat, and the gold trade deficit narrowed compared to the previous month.
In July, provisional foreign trade data pointed to a decrease in imports and flattening in exports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
Accordingly, on an annualized basis, the improvement in the current account balance, which came to a standstill in June, is projected to resume in July, bolstered by travel revenues.
Gold imports fell below their historical averages in July, dropping to around USD 19.5 billion in annualized terms.
Despite successive decreases in June and July, consumption goods imports remain elevated in seasonally adjusted terms.
When the provisional foreign trade data for July is considered along with the high frequency data for August, the three-month average trends imply a moderate fall in exports and a rise in imports.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long- term debt rollover ratio stood around 141% in June.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 101%.
In July, consumer prices were up 3.23%, while annual inflation fell by 9.82 percentage points to 61.78% due also to the base effect.
Annual changes in the core indicators B and C declined to 60.31% and 60.23%, respectively.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, monthly consumer inflation increased compared to the previous month.
This was mainly driven by revised lump sum taxes and higher administered prices, as well as fresh fruit and vegetable prices, which increased contrary to seasonal averages.
In July, inflation in the energy group was notable due to the rise in residential electricity tariffs and the automatic tax arrangements in fuel and bottled gas.
Monthly price increases in the services group followed a high course in this period as well.
In this group, price increases strengthened across subgroups with rents, communication and transport in the lead.
The price increase in core goods remained limited due to the durable goods subgroup (excluding gold), which posted a mild course amid the exchange rate and domestic demand developments.
Having remained subdued in the last couple of months in particular, clothing inflation also supported this outlook.
In the unprocessed food subgroup, prices of poultry meat declined further, while red meat prices remained relatively flat.
Prices of fresh fruits and vegetables increased in contrary to seasonal averages due also to hot weather, limiting a more favorable outlook in the food group.
In the processed food subgroup, monthly inflation edged down compared to the previous month, while the bread and cereals item stood out with the price increase.
The underlying trend of monthly inflation rose slightly in July but remained below its second- quarter average.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 2.6% and 2.5%, respectively, and receded further.
In July, processed food, which is among the groups making up the B index, recorded a slight deceleration, whereas other groups posted increases.
The Median, SATRIM, the diffusion index and other underlying trend indicators also posted a month-on-month uptick.
While goods inflation is declining, improvement in services inflation is expected to lag.
The high level of and the stickiness in services inflation, inflation expectations, and geopolitical developments keep inflationary risks alive.
Core goods inflation has receded to low levels.
Meanwhile, services inflation exhibits strong backward-indexation.
This prevalent price setting behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time.
In July, annual inflation was recorded at 38.25% in core goods, and it was around 47 percentage points higher in services at 85.63%.
In tandem with the higher rate of contract renewals in July, rent inflation maintained its high course.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that monthly rent inflation will remain high due to the noteworthy level of renewed contracts in August.
However, the high inertia in this item is considered to cause rent inflation to remain high and continue to shape the course of consumer inflation in the disinflation period, albeit at a declining rate.
Prices in transport services recorded an uptick in July following the rise in fuel prices, which was mainly driven by tariffs for urban passenger transport and intercity passenger transport by road.
The price increases in communication services were largely due to mobile phone and internet fees.
Monthly inflation in the restaurants-hotels subgroup edged up month-on- month, led by catering services, while hotel prices were on the rise as well.
Health services saw price hikes following the revisions to the tariffs of the Turkish Medical Association.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.94% in July, and annual inflation dropped by 8.72 percentage points to 41.37% due to the high base effect.
According to the Main Industrial Groupings (MIGs), energy prices stood out with a monthly increase of 6.28%, while price increases in other groups, particularly in durable and non-durable consumption goods, remained moderate.
Having started in late April, the fall in international commodity prices continued in July.
Across subgroups, global energy prices edged up, while non-energy commodity prices declined significantly.
In the first three weeks of August, commodity prices were on the decline, led by crude oil prices.
Both global energy prices and non-energy commodity prices fell in this period.
Brent crude oil prices, which averaged USD 85.3 in July, dropped to USD 80.9 approximately in the first three weeks of August.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index hovered close to its historical average in July.
Meanwhile, in July, the seasonally-adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data increased both in input and final product price indices and returned to the May levels.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in August, inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year edged up by 0.3 and 0.2 percentage points to 43.3% and 25.6%, respectively.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.3 percentage points from 30.0% to 28.7%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was unchanged at 19.3%.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.7%.
The current levels of inflation expectations continue to pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
On the other hand, in the same period, the 12-month- ahead inflation expectations of households appear to have increased slightly from 71.49% to 71.98%.
The Committee emphasized that the alignment of inflation expectations and pricing behavior with projections has gained relative importance for the disinflation process.
Leading indicators suggest that monthly inflation will slow down in August compared to the previous month, led by the low course of food prices.
The favorable course in food prices is driven by the unprocessed food group, which registers a decline led by fresh fruit and vegetable prices.
In this period, as the three-month average increases in core indicators B and C remain flat, the underlying trend of inflation is not expected to display a significant change.
Despite the fall in fuel prices, monthly energy inflation will remain high due to the adjustment in natural gas tariffs for households.
Leading indicators suggest that thanks to the recent mild course of exchange rates and domestic demand developments, price increases in core goods remain below those of other groups.
The favorable outlook in durable goods continues.
Nevertheless, price increases in the services group remain strong.
In addition to rents, administered transport services and education stand out.
University tuition fees, particularly private universities, have increased significantly, and this year, university tuition fees have been reflected on the index earlier because of the admission period.
Accordingly, it should be noted that the impact of price adjustments linked to university tuition fees will be observed on monthly services inflation and thus on core indicators in the next two months.
Sterilization tools will continue to be implemented effectively.
The limited improvement in the global growth outlook continued in the second quarter of the year while the normalization trend seen in the labor market supply-demand balance was maintained.
The services sector continued to follow a favorable course while the manufacturing industry remained weak.
Global inflation continues to decline, and the inflation data from the US supports the fact that price rigidity in the services sector has begun to weaken.
Meanwhile, it is noteworthy that services inflation has not slowed down to the same extent across advanced economies.
The US Federal Reserve also cut its policy rate by 50 basis points in September.
Even though the ongoing improvement in the inflation outlook and the recent developments regarding services inflation strengthen expectations for rate cuts, central banks of advanced economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts.
On the other hand, risk appetite and portfolio flows to EMEs' equity markets have fluctuated due to global uncertainties.
With the overnight interest rates averaging between the policy rate and the upper band of the interest rate corridor during the last MPC meeting period and the effect of the amendments in reserve requirement regulations, Turkish lira deposit rates increased by 67 basis points since the week ending August 23 and stood at 56.14% as of September 13.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 40 basis points to 56.59%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 43 basis points to 73.65% while housing loan rates decreased by 27 basis points to 43.22%.
Vehicle loan rates, which follow a fluctuating course in general, were 43.78% as of September 13.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans has increased since the week ending August 23 from 2.27% to 3.27%.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loans remained below growth limits, at an average four-week growth rate of 1.51%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates declined to 1.43%.
In order to support the monetary transmission mechanism, certain macroprudential measures have been taken since the last MPC meeting period.
Accordingly, as announced in the press release dated August 29, 2024, a number of changes were introduced in the reserve requirement practice.
The monthly growth target was increased to 0.8 percentage points for banks with real-person TRY deposit shares between 45% and 50%.
The monthly growth target was abolished for banks with real-person TRY deposit shares exceeding 60%, and the mere condition of keeping this share above 60% was introduced.
Legal-person FX-protected (KKM) accounts were included in the calculation of the total target for KKM accounts’ transition to TRY and renewals.
The upper limit for the remuneration of required reserves, which should be maintained for TRY deposits, based on the rate of transition to TRY, was increased to 84% of the policy rate.
The ratio for maintaining TRY required reserves in blocked accounts was increased by 5 percentage points.
As a result of the tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential policies supporting this stance, the share of TRY deposits increased while the balances of KKM accounts and FX deposits declined.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 3.14 billion since August 23 to USD 153.55 billion as of September 13, 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 261 basis points on September 18, 2024, posting a slight decline since August 19.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 10.78%, and the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility fell to 21.51% as of September 18.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 0.11 billion, comprising USD 0.44 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 0.32 billion of outflows from equity markets.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data pointed to a decline in annual and quarterly growth rates in the second quarter of the year.
In this period, the contribution of final domestic demand to annual growth decreased markedly while net exports continued to contribute positively to growth.
Thus, on the expenditures side, the composition of growth displayed a more balanced demand outlook.
Meanwhile, on the production side, the services sector was the main driver of annual growth in the second quarter whereas the industrial value-added had a downward effect on growth.
The weak course of the industrial sector is assessed to have been driven by the two religious holidays and bridge days in the second quarter.
GDP data for the first half of the year suggest a moderate slowdown in economic activity, taking into account factors such as the brought-forward demand in the first quarter and the bridge days in the second quarter.
Indicators for the third quarter confirm that domestic demand continues to slow down with a diminishing inflationary impact.
In July, the retail sales volume index increased on a monthly and quarterly basis while its annual growth lost pace.
During the same period, the trade sales volume index dropped both on monthly and quarterly basis in line with the decline in trade of motor vehicles and wholesale trade, the other two main components of the index.
The services production index, which had fallen in the second quarter, decreased slightly in July and also continued to decline on a quarterly basis.
In August, card spending posted a limited monthly and quarterly increase.
Although the mild course in seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods continued in this period, imports of consumption goods still remain at an elevated level.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate a quarterly decline in domestic market orders.
Against this background, consumption indicators as a whole suggest that the slowdown in domestic demand continues at a moderate pace.
In July, the industrial production index increased by 0.4% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, but declined by 3.9% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 0.6%.
The sector-wide monthly rise in July is attributed to the mechanical effect that compensated for the loss of production stemming from the three-day-long bridge days in June associated with the administrative extension of the religious holiday.
Excluding the bridge days and highly volatile sectors, the underlying trend of industrial production in July is estimated to have been relatively weak.
Meanwhile, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate posted a quarterly decline in the third quarter.
As of July, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 0.3% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.7 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up slightly while the unemployment rate remained flat at 8.8%.
Survey indicators suggest a decline in manufacturing firms' future employment expectations.
In July, the current account balance ran a monthly surplus of USD 566 million, whereas the annualized current account deficit decreased by USD 5.9 billion to USD 19.1 billion.
This decrease was mostly driven by the fall in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
On the other hand, the energy trade deficit remained relatively flat, and the gold trade deficit narrowed significantly compared to the previous month.
In August, provisional foreign trade data pointed to growth in both imports and exports, in seasonally adjusted terms, and a bit more pronounced one in exports.
Accordingly, on an annualized basis, the improvement in the current account balance is projected to continue also in August, bolstered by travel revenues.
Gold imports were close to their historical averages in August, but dropped to around USD 17.5 billion in annualized terms.
Having decreased in the previous three months, imports of consumption goods posted a limited rise in August, and remained elevated in seasonally adjusted terms.
When the provisional foreign trade data for August is considered along with the high frequency data for September, the three-month average trends imply a sustained strength in exports, and a mild course in imports, similar to the previous month.
These trends point to a limited increase in consumption goods imports in September.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long- term debt rollover ratio stood at around 147% in July.
Accordingly, for the banking sector, external financing opportunities appear to have improved over the previous month.
In August, consumer prices were up by 2.47%, while annual inflation fell by 9.81 percentage points to 51.97% due also to the high base effect.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 9.44 and 8.67 percentage points to 50.87% and 51.56%, respectively.
In August, the contribution to inflation dropped across all groups.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, monthly consumer inflation slowed slightly.
Administered prices once again had a significant impact on headline inflation in August (by 1.2 percentage points), although there was a month-on-month decline in their contribution.
In August, monthly price increases in the services group maintained their strong course.
The standout items with price hikes in the services group were transport services, due to the adjustments in administered prices, and education services driven by university tuition fees, as well as rents.
Despite a slight increase, monthly core goods inflation remained low in seasonally- adjusted terms.
This was mainly due to the rise in automobile prices caused by general safety regulations and the course of the euro exchange rate.
The prices in the food group decreased in August, led by the unprocessed food subgroup.
The main driver of the decline in unprocessed food prices was fresh fruits and vegetables, whose prices saw a sharper drop than their seasonal averages.
In this period, both red meat and white meat prices decreased.
Price increases in the processed food subgroup weakened in August while the slowdown in the monthly inflation in bread and cereals was noteworthy.
Monthly energy inflation, which followed a strong course in the previous month due to the electricity and fuel led developments, remained high due to the adjustments in natural gas tariffs for households.
On the other hand, the decline in fuel prices in line with global developments curbed the monthly energy inflation.
When all indicators pertinent to monthly inflation are jointly analyzed, its underlying trend is assessed to have displayed no discernible change in August.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were relatively flat at 2.7% and 2.5%, respectively.
In August, processed food, which is among the groups making up the B index, recorded a slight deceleration, whereas other groups posted increases.
The impact of certain items with strong time-dependent price setting tendencies, such as education, on indicators based on methods of exclusion, such as B and C indices, was notable.
Contrary to this outlook, other underlying trend indicators that are based on the distribution of monthly price changes of subgroups, such as the Median, SATRIM, and the dynamic factor model, as well as the diffusion index weakened month- on-month.
Services inflation still exhibits strong backward-indexation.
This prevalent price-setting behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time.
In August, annual inflation was recorded at 28.91% in core goods, and it was around 49 percentage points higher in services at 77.83%.
Moreover, the diffusion index for the services sector indicated that price increases continued to spread across the sector.
In tandem with the higher rate of contract renewals in August, rent inflation increased somewhat and remained strong.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that rent increases will remain high due to the noteworthy level of renewed contracts in September.
On the other hand, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data, and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI).
In fact, it is noteworthy that rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts show a decline in the RPS data for September.
Monthly rent inflation is expected to decelerate in the last quarter of the year as contract renewal rates will fall compared to the third quarter, and the rate of rent increases in new and renewed contracts will continue to decline.
The increase in prices in transport services became more discernible in August in line with developments in energy prices.
This is mainly attributed to urban passenger transport by road and air passenger transport fees.
Contrary to the previous year, the increase in university tuition fees started to take place in August as enrollments began at an earlier date this year.
Following the high rate of increases announced, education services became another item whose inflation stood out.
Meanwhile, the slowdown in monthly inflation of the restaurants-hotels subgroup was noteworthy, accompanied by moderate price increases in items such as package tours and communication.
As the adjustments in private school and university tuition fees have been completed, price increases in education services will weaken considerably in the last quarter of the year.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.68% in August, and annual inflation dropped by 5.62 percentage points to 38.75% due also to the high base effect.
According to the main industrial groupings, energy prices remained on the forefront with a monthly increase of 3.04% while price increases in other groups, particularly in non-durable consumption and intermediate goods, were more moderate.
Having started in late April, the fall in international commodity prices continued in August as well.
Across subgroups, declines were widespread except for gold, and this decline was driven by the energy group led by crude oil.
As of the first three weeks of September, the decline in energy prices continued.
The decline was driven by Brent crude oil prices dropping to USD 74.1 approximately in the first three weeks of September after hovering around USD 80.9 in August.
Meanwhile, non-energy commodity prices have been increasing slightly due to agricultural products.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index edged up in August, hovering slightly above its historical average.
Container indices for the globe and China, which had posted an increase after April, started to decrease in August while dry cargo transport indices have been on a relatively mild track.
After mildly strengthening in August, the rise in the basket exchange rate weakened again in September and exchange rate-driven pressures proved temporary.
Meanwhile, in August, the seasonally-adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data point that input prices remained flat and final product prices increased slightly.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in September, inflation expectations declined across all horizons.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was down by 1.2 percentage points from 28.7% to 27.5% while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was down by 0.9 percentage points from 19.3% to 18.4%.
Moreover, inflation expectations for the end of current year and the next year decreased by 0.2 and 0.3 percentage points to 43.1% and 25.3%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.2%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of firms declined from 55.0% in June to 53.8% in August, showing a limited improvement.
On the other hand, in the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of households increased slightly from 72.0% to 73.1%.
The Committee noted that inflation expectations and pricing behavior continue to pose risks to the disinflation process.
Leading indicators suggest that seasonally adjusted monthly consumer inflation will slow down in September compared to the previous month.
Average monthly inflation in B and C indicators is expected to follow a relatively flat course in seasonally adjusted terms.
In September, the core goods group has registered a somewhat stronger price increase.
Meanwhile, monthly services inflation has remained elevated.
Services inflation has been marked by the start of the new education year in September.
The carry-over effects of university tuition fees pushed education services upwards while school bus fares spurred prices of transport services.
Moreover, the increase in dormitory fees added to the inflation in the restaurants-hotels subgroup.
Price developments in items other than school bus fares have been moderate in transport services.
After a decline in August, food prices are expected to edge up in September but remain on a favorable track.
Processed food inflation recorded a month-on-month deceleration and price increases appear to be mild across the group.
In the energy group, tariff revisions in administered items ended in August while fuel prices receded in line with global developments.
Having surged due to administered prices in the last couple of months, energy prices are assessed to remain relatively flat in this period.
While core goods inflation remains low despite a slight uptick, the improvement in services inflation is expected to occur in the last quarter.
As the relative price adjustments have been completed to a large extent in items exhibiting strong time-dependent price setting as well as backward-indexation behaviours, services inflation is expected to follow a milder course in the last quarter with rent inflation displaying some improvement as well.
The Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, but reiterated that it remains highly attentive to inflation risks.
Monetary policy tools will be used effectively in case a significant and persistent deterioration in inflation is foreseen.
China's stimulus measures, as well as geopolitical developments, led to widespread increases in commodity prices.
The cautious pace of interest rate cuts to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity.
Global inflation continues to decline and rigidity in the services inflation weakens.
As advanced economies continue to cut interest rates, a growing number of central banks of emerging economies (EMEs) join the rate-cutting process.
Central banks of both advanced and emerging economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
With the overnight interest rates materializing around the policy rate during the last MPC meeting period and the effect of the amendments in reserve requirement regulations, Turkish lira deposit rates decreased by 31 basis points since the week ending September 20 and stood at 55.9% as of October 11.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) increased by 85 basis points to 55.8%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 24 basis points to 71.7% while housing loan rates decreased by 159 basis points to 41.6%.
Vehicle loan rates, which follow a fluctuating course in general, were 43.3% as of October 11.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans has decreased since September 20 from 3.3% to 2.%.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loans stood at an average four-week growth rate of 2.3%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates remained below the FX commercial loan growth limits and declined to 1.5%.
To support macrofinancial stability and the monetary transmission mechanism, certain macroprudential measures have been taken since the last MPC meeting period.
Accordingly, as announced in the press release dated September 21, 2024, reserve requirement ratios for Turkish lira (TRY) deposits have been raised from 12% to 15% for demand and notice deposits, as well as time deposits with maturities up to (and including) 3 months and from 8% to 10% for deposits with longer maturities.
The reserve requirement ratio for FX- denominated deposits/participation funds maintained in Turkish lira have been reduced from 8% to 5%.
In addition, the remuneration of required reserves that should be maintained for TRY deposits will no longer be conditional on the transition-to-TRY rate.
The maximum commission rate of 5% applied based on the level of transition-to-TRY rate has been raised to 8%.
With the amendment introduced on September 27, 2024, to limit the borrowing behavior and contribute to the moderation in domestic demand, the maximum contractual interest rates for personal credit cards (PCC) were differentiated based on the amount of term debt as of November 1, 2024.
Accordingly, regarding credit card transactions in TRY (excluding cash withdrawal or usage transactions), the maximum contractual interest rates will be 3.50% for PCCs with term debt less than TRY 25,000; 4.25% for those with term debt between TRY 25,000 and 150,000 and 4.75% for those with term debt exceeding TRY 150,000 as well as corporate credit cards irrespective of their term debt amount.
Additionally, the maximum interest rate applicable to the restructuring of PCCs has been limited to the reference rate.
The daily limit of TRY 3 billion for rediscount credits used to finance exports was raised to TRY 4 billion upon the decision of October 8, 2024.
On the same date, the condition of being a net exporter was replaced by the implementation of an exporter score, to be effective as of January 13, 2025.
With this new data-based practice, exporter scores of firms will be calculated by considering variables such as the diversity of exported products and export destinations, the technological level of exported products and scale of firms, in addition to their net exporter status.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) increased by USD 0.99 billion since September 20 to USD 157.39 billion as of October 11, 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 267 basis points on October 16, 2024, posting a slight increase since September 18.
The one-month and 12- month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 11.83% and 22.60%, respectively, as of October 16.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.10 billion, comprising USD 1.22 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 0.11 billion of outflows from equity markets.
In August, the retail and trade sales volume indices increased on a monthly and quarterly basis.
The services production index, which provides insight into both the production of services and their demand, decreased slightly in August, as it did in July, and also continued to decline on a quarterly basis.
In September, card spending posted a monthly increase while the data for the first week of October showed signs of normalization.
The course of automobile and white good sales indicates a gradual slowdown in domestic demand in the third quarter.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods also increased in the August-September period, but declined quarter-on-quarter.
Besides, survey data for manufacturing firms indicate a quarterly decline in domestic market orders in the third quarter.
In sum, indicators for the third quarter suggest that domestic demand continues to slow down, approaching disinflationary levels.
Information on consumption expenditures from interviews with firms indicate a relatively flat outlook in domestic demand in the last quarter of the year.
In August, the industrial production index decreased by 1.6% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and by 5.3% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
The decline in the vehicle sector production due to long factory holidays during the summer also had a moderate downward effect on industrial production.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 1.5%.
Excluding the typically volatile sectors, the underlying trend of industrial production is assessed to have remained weak in August.
As of August, seasonally adjusted employment rose by 0.3% on a quarterly basis and stood at 32.8 million people.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up slightly while the unemployment rate edged down by 0.1 percentage points to 8.6%.
In August, the current account balance ran a monthly surplus of USD 4.3 billion, whereas the annualized current account deficit decreased to USD 11.3 billion due also to backward revisions.
Based on the “International Trade in Services Statistics, 2023” bulletin published by TURKSTAT, the backward revision in the services balance item had a downward impact of approximately USD 4 billion on the annualized current account deficit.
Excluding this impact, the improvement in the cumulative current account balance in August was driven by the fall in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy as well as in gold trade deficit.
On the other hand, the energy trade deficit remained relatively flat.
During this period, the annualized services balance surplus remained robust.
In September, provisional foreign trade data pointed to a slight decline in exports and a mild growth in imports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
Accordingly, on an annualized basis, the low level of current account deficit is projected to be largely maintained in September amid the ongoing strong contribution of travel revenues.
Gold imports amounted to USD 1.2 billion in September, but dropped to USD 16.8 billion in annualized terms.
Having decreased in the May-July period, seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods increased in August and September.
When the provisional foreign trade data for September is considered along with the high frequency data for October, the three-month average trends point to a sustained strength in exports, and an increase in imports.
These trends imply a flat course in consumption goods imports in October.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long- term debt rollover ratio stood at around 145% in August.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 105%.
Accordingly, for the non-bank corporate sectors, external financing opportunities appear to have improved over the previous month.
In September, consumer prices were up by 2.97% while annual inflation fell by 2.59 percentage points to 49.38%.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 2.64 and 2.46 percentage points to 48.23% and 49.10%, respectively.
In September, the contribution to annual inflation dropped across all main groups.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, monthly consumer inflation remained flat over the previous month, standing at 2.8%.
In September, monthly price increases in the services group maintained their strong course.
The prominent items with price hikes in the services group were rents as well as transport, accommodation, and education services affected by the opening of schools.
The price increase in the core goods group accelerated somewhat, also reflecting exchange rate developments.
This acceleration was mainly driven by white goods and automobile items as well as by the clothing and footwear subgroup which saw stronger price hikes due to the launch of the new season.
On the other hand, core goods inflation remained on a mild track compared to other groups.
Having declined in the previous month, food prices posted a relatively large increase in this period.
Inflation in the unprocessed food group rose, led by vegetable prices.
Meanwhile, the processed food group displayed a relatively favorable outlook.
Energy prices also followed a mild course in this period.
In September, the underlying trend of inflation posted a slight increase.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases were flat in the B index and slightly higher in the C index compared to the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices somewhat strengthened to 2.7% and 2.8%, respectively.
In this period, among the components of the B index, price increases lost pace in processed food and remained flat in services while rising in core goods.
Median, SATRIM, and other indicators of underlying trend also increased somewhat.
When all indicators pertinent to underlying inflation in September are jointly analyzed, the three-month average increase grew slightly stronger to 2.5% from 2.4% in the previous month.
Over the last three months as of September, the seasonally adjusted average price increase was 1.5% in core goods and higher at 4.1% in services.
In September, services inflation was shaped by opening of schools in addition to rents.
Price increases in transport services was mainly affected by school bus fares.
Meanwhile, prices in education services increased due to the carry-over effect of university tuition fees into September, which were raised in August.
Monthly inflation in restaurants-hotels picked up slightly month-on-month, owing mostly to the rise in student residence fees in the accommodation group following the start of university term.
Seasonally adjusted monthly rent inflation decelerated month-on-month, yet remained on a high track.
On the other hand, prices of catering services rose moderately in also September following August.
In this period, monthly inflation in communication remained relatively flat at a low level.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that rent increases will fall due also to the decline in renewed contracts in October.
On the other hand, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data, and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI) and are decreasing.
The expected fall in contract renewal rates in the last quarter of the year compared to the third quarter coupled with the lower rate of rent increases used as a reference in contracts indicate that monthly rent inflation will decelerate in the period ahead.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.37% in September, and annual inflation dropped by 2.66 percentage points to 33.09% due also to the high base effect.
Accross the main industrial groupings, price increases were moderate.
Prices of capital goods rose by 1.89% in this period while intermediate goods and energy restrained the headline rate.
Pressures led by domestic producer prices weakened notably in the last three-month period, which favorably affected goods inflation.
Having started in late April, the fall in international commodity prices continued in September.
Across subgroups, the energy group was the main driver of this fall due to the decline in crude oil prices while other groups registered increases.
After a long while, the FAO food prices index recorded a monthly uptick in September, which spread across subgroups.
In the first half of October, prices in the energy group trended upwards.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 74.3 on average in September, reached approximately USD 77.4 in the first half of October due also to the heightened geopolitical risks.
Being led by both agricultural prices and industrial metals, non-energy commodity prices also went up in the same period.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index hovered around its historical average in September.
The downtrend in container indices for the globe and China, which was seen after July, continued in September.
Meanwhile, dry cargo transport indices fluctuated, yet have been on a flat course on average in the second half of the year.
The basket exchange rate, which recorded a mild increase in August, edged up in September, leading exchange rate-driven pressures to weaken.
The seasonally adjusted PMI data point to a decline in input prices for the manufacturing industry in September.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in October, inflation expectations increased for the year ends of 2024 and 2025, but declined for the medium term.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation remained relatively flat at 27.4% while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was down by 0.3 percentage points to 18.1%.
On the other hand, inflation expectations for the end of current year and the next year were revised upwards by 1.0 and 0.3 percentage points to 44.1% and 25.6%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.3%, remaining almost unchanged.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of firms, which was 53.8% in August, declined by 2.7% to 51.1%in September.
Similarly, in the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of households fell by 1.5 percentage points to 71.6%.
Leading indicators suggest that October inflation will mostly be affected by food prices.
In this period, unprocessed food prices are likely to remain on an upward course due to fresh fruits and vegetables.
Fresh fruits and vegetables, which are relatively beyond the control of monetary policy, witnessed price increases due to the seasonal transition, as well.
In this period, seasonally adjusted core goods inflation followed a moderate course.
In this group, clothing prices rose amid seasonal effects.
Meanwhile, durable consumption goods recorded a weak uptick, yet their composition displayed a diverse outlook.
While core goods inflation remains low, the improvement in services inflation is expected to occur in the last quarter.
However, the uncertainty regarding the pace of improvement in inflation has increased in light of incoming data.
The decisiveness regarding tight monetary stance will bring down the underlying trend of monthly inflation through moderation in domestic demand, real appreciation in the Turkish lira, and improvement in inflation expectations.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will make its policy decisions so as to create the monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
Indicators of inflation and the underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored, and the Committee will decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The global demand outlook, supply-side factors and geopolitical risks lead commodity prices to fluctuate.
Uncertainties regarding global economic and trade policies, as well as geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity.
Global inflation continues to decline.
Rigidity in services inflation weakens, yet keeps the upside risks to inflation alive.
As advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
On the other hand, portfolio outflows from EMEs’ markets have recently been observed due to global uncertainties.
With the help of macroprudential policies prioritizing Turkish lira (TRY) deposits, deposit rates remained almost unchanged compared to the week ending October 18, and stood at 56.0% as of November 15.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 382 basis points to 52.7%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) declined by 70 basis points to 70.4% while housing loan rates decreased by 53 basis points to 40.9%.
Vehicle loan rates, which follow a fluctuating course in general, were 40.7% as of November 15.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans increased after October 18 from 2.0% to 2.3%.
This increase was driven by the rise in the growth of general-purpose and housing loans.
In the same period, TRY commercial loans fell from an average four-week growth rate of 2.3% to 1.1%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates remained unchanged at 1.5% over the previous MPC meeting period.
Thus, commercial loan growth materialized below loan restrictions.
In light of the rising share of TRY deposits, the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) decided to take simplification steps to the macroprudential framework on November 22, 2024.
In this regard, reserve requirement ratios for short-term TRY deposits were raised from 15% to 17% while the ratio for TRY-denominated required reserves that should be maintained for FX deposits was reduced from 5% to 4%.
In addition, the TRY deposit share target for legal persons was abolished and the total target for KKM accounts’ transition to TRY and renewals was reduced from 75% to 70%.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT decreased by USD 2.68 billion since October 18 to USD 156.68 billion as of November 15, 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 260 basis points on November 20, 2024, posting a slight decline since October 16.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 12.97% as of November 20 while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility dropped to 22.22%.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 2.35 billion, comprising USD 2.56 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 0.21 billion of outflows from the equity market.
In September, the retail and trade sales volume indices increased on a monthly and quarterly basis.
However, the quarterly increase in the retail sales volume is milder when gold is excluded.
The services production index, which provides insight into both the production of services and their demand, decreased in the third quarter, continuing to decline on a quarterly basis.
The course of automobile and white goods sales indicated a gradual slowdown in domestic demand in the third quarter.
In October, card spending remained almost flat while the data for the first week of November imply a moderate fall.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that domestic market orders remain weak in the fourth quarter as in the third quarter.
In this respect, indicators for the last quarter, such as high- frequency data and survey data, suggest that domestic demand continues to slow down, reaching disinflationary levels.
In September, the industrial production index increased by 1.6% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and decreased by 2.4% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
Thus, the monthly decline in industrial production in August was mostly offset in September.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 1.3%.
Excluding the typically volatile sectors, industrial production posted a limited fall in quarterly terms, but its underlying trend is assessed to have remained weak.
Meanwhile, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate continues its quarterly decline in the last quarter.
In September, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.8 million people, growing by 0.4% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up slightly quarter- on-quarter while the unemployment rate stood at 8.7%.
Survey indicators suggest a weak outlook in manufacturing firms' future employment expectations.
In September, the current account balance posted a monthly surplus of USD 3 billion, whereas the 12-month cumulative current account deficit decreased to USD 9.7 billion due also to backward-looking upward revisions in travel revenues.
The improvement in the cumulative current account balance in September was driven by the monthly falls in the energy trade deficit and gold trade deficit.
On the other hand, the 12-month cumulative foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy increased compared to the previous month.
During this period, the 12-month cumulative services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 59.9 billion.
In October, provisional foreign trade data pointed to a slight decline in exports and an increase in imports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
The 12-month cumulative figures reveal that foreign trade balance improved compared to the previous month.
Accordingly, the 12- month cumulative current account deficit is projected to narrow further in October with the ongoing strong contribution of travel revenues.
Gold imports amounted to USD 1.7 billion in October, but dropped to USD 16.6 billion in cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods declined in the third quarter compared to the previous quarter, but increased again in October.
Excluding the jewelry imports, which has recently contributed significantly to the rise in consumption goods imports, the consumption goods imports appears to have a flatter outlook.
When the provisional foreign trade data for October is considered along with the high-frequency leading data for November, the three-month average trends point to a sustained strength in exports and an increase in imports.
These trends imply an increase in consumption goods imports in November.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio stood at around 140% in September.
In the non- bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 112%.
In October, consumer prices were up by 2.88% while annual inflation fell by 0.80 percentage points to 48.58%.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 1.13 and 1.35 percentage points to 47.10% and 47.75%, respectively.
In October, the contribution to annual inflation was down in services, energy, and alcohol-tobacco-gold groups while that of food and core goods groups went up.
While core goods inflation remains low, signs for an improvement in services inflation have become more apparent.
In October, monthly price increases in the services group lost pace.
This was led by the weakening rents and restaurants-hotels groups as well as by the other services group due in part to the end of the education-driven relative price adjustment.
In October, the impact of food prices on consumer inflation stood out.
Unprocessed food prices, which are sensitive to temporary supply conditions, posted a strong rise driven by fresh fruits and vegetables, thereby fueling this development.
As a matter of fact, monthly food inflation excluding fresh fruits and vegetables remained lower at 1.29%.
Energy prices followed a mild course in October.
The underlying trend of inflation registered a decline in October.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases slowed in both B and C indices, being more pronounced in the latter, compared to the previous month.
In this period, among the components of the B index, price increases lost pace in services and core goods but rose in processed food.
When all indicators pertinent to underlying inflation in October were jointly analyzed, the three- month average increase receded to 2.4% from 2.6% in the previous month.
The prevalent price-setting behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time.
The backward-indexation behavior in the services sector remains relatively strong.
As of October, the seasonally- adjusted average price increase over the last three months was 1.6% in core goods while this rate has weakened compared to the previous month and materialized as 3.7% in services.
Along with the mild course of some services items sensitive to demand, the decline in services items with time-dependent price setting led to a notable slowdown in monthly services inflation, which stood at 1.95% in October.
In October, monthly services inflation decelerated amid seasonal factors.
In this period, the decline in the prices of transport services was mainly driven by air transport and intercity transport by road.
Other services inflation weakened compared to the previous month, partly due to the completion of the education-driven effects.
Monthly rent inflation eased in October due to falling contract renewal rates as well as the lower rate of rent increase in contracts.
Monthly inflation in restaurants-hotels lost momentum as the mild course in catering services was accompanied by price decreases in the accommodation group.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that rent increases will fall due in part to the decline in renewed contracts in November.
On the other hand, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI) and are decreasing.
The fall in contract renewal rates in the last quarter of the year compared to the third quarter, coupled with the lower rate of rent increases used as a reference in contracts, indicates that monthly rent inflation will decelerate in December as well.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.29% in October, and annual inflation dropped by 0.85 percentage points to 32.24%.
Across the main industrial groupings, prices of durable consumption goods stood out with an increase of 2.82% in this period.
Capital goods (0.67%) and energy (-0.56%) pulled headline producer inflation down.
Pressures led by domestic producer prices weakened notably in the second half of the year, which favorably affected goods inflation.
As for international commodity prices, the rise in non-energy commodities in September spread across main groups in October.
The monthly rise in the FAO food price index in September extended into October.
Price increases in the oil subgroup were notable in the wake of production disruptions.
Yet, in the first half of November, commodity prices declined across subgroups.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 75.7 on average in October, remained volatile, due in part to geopolitical developments, and are approximately at USD 74.3 level in the first half of November.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index decreased and hovered slightly below its historical average in October.
The downtrend in container indices for the globe and China, which was seen after July, continued in October as well, and the rise in dry cargo transport indices in September was replaced by a decline in this period.
The basket exchange rate remained almost flat.
The seasonally adjusted PMI data point to a slowdown in input and goods prices in the manufacturing industry in October.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in November, inflation expectations displayed a partial rise.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased by 0.2 percentage points to 27.2% while inflation expectations for the end of the current year and the next year were revised upwards by 0.7 and 0.6 percentage points to 44.8% and 26.2%, respectively.
The 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was up by 0.3 percentage points to 18.3%.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.1%, pointing to a 0.2 percentage point decrease.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of firms, which was 51.1% in September, declined by 1.6 percentage points to 49.5% in October.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of households fell more significantly by 4.3 percentage points to 67.2%.
While inflation expectations and pricing behavior tend to improve, they continue to pose risks to the disinflation process.
Leading indicators suggest that, similar to the previous month, the impact of food prices on consumer inflation will remain prominent in November.
In contrast, monthly consumer inflation excluding food displays a more favorable track.
Seasonally-adjusted monthly consumer inflation excluding food is on a gradual slowdown.
Unprocessed food inflation remains elevated due to temporary supply conditions.
This outlook is mainly driven by fresh fruits and vegetables prices According to leading indicators, core goods prices posted a limited increase in November while the relatively moderate price increases in the services group continued, as well.
The Committee decided to keep the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) constant at 50%.
Increased coordination of fiscal policy will also contribute significantly to this process.
Accordingly, the level of the policy rate will be determined in a way to ensure the tightness required by the projected disinflation path, taking into account both realized and expected inflation.
The Committee reiterated that it remains highly attentive to inflation risks.
The limited improvement in global growth continued in the third quarter of the year while the normalization trend seen in the labor market supply-demand balance was maintained.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is forecasted to grow by 1.9% in 2024, slightly higher than the 1.8% growth recorded in 2023.
The growth rate is expected to be close to its historical average at 2.3% in 2025.
The global demand outlook, supply-side factors, and geopolitical risks lead commodity prices to fluctuate.
Uncertainties regarding global economic and trade policies, as well as geopolitical developments are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity.
While advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continued the rate-cutting process, the US Federal Reserve's (Fed) communication of more limited easing for 2025 at its December meeting was noteworthy.
The central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
On the other hand, portfolio outflows from EME equity markets have continued due to heightened global uncertainties.
With the help of macroprudential policies prioritizing Turkish lira (TRY) deposits, deposit rates increased by 48 basis points compared to the week ending November 22, and stood at 56.5% as of December 20.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 33 basis points to 55.2%.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) declined by 146 basis points to 69.2% while housing loan rates decreased by 27 basis points to 41%.
Vehicle loan rates were 36.1% as of December 20.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans increased after November 22 from 2.3% to 3.5%.
This increase was driven especially by the acceleration in credit card and general- purpose loans.
In addition to the discount campaigns that intensified in the last month of the year, banks' usual tendency towards asset creation via loan expansion towards year-end was effective in the increase of personal credit card and consumer loans.
In the same period, TRY commercial loans edged up from an average four-week growth rate of 1.1% to 1.4%.
Thus, the growth rate of TRY commercial loans remained below the loan growth restrictions.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates rose from 1.5% of the previous MPC meeting period to 2.3% on the back of loans exempted from FX loan growth restrictions.
The CBRT made revisions to the macroprudential framework on December 20, 2024 to support the decline in the FX-protected deposit (KKM) balance.
Accordingly, the total target for KKM accounts’ transition to TRY and renewals was reduced from 70% to 60%, and the minimum interest rate applicable to KKM accounts was decreased from 70% to 50% of the policy rate.
Additionally, the remuneration of reserve requirements maintained for KKM accounts was terminated for new KKM accounts or for those to be renewed.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT decreased by USD 0.4 billion since November 22 to USD 156.2 billion as of December 20, 2024.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 259 basis points on December 24, 2024, posting a slight decline since November 20.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira fell to 11.7% as of December 24 while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility dropped to 20.5%.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio outflows have totaled USD 0.2 billion.
While almost all of this outflow stemmed from the Government Domestic Debt Securities (GDDS) market, the outflow from the stock market materialized at a very limited level.
Gross domestic product (GDP) data pointed to a slight deceleration in economic activity in the third quarter.
In this period, contribution of consumption to annual growth remained moderate, despite a quarter-on-quarter increase.
Meanwhile, positive contribution of net exports to annual growth continued.
Private consumption declined further on a quarterly basis while investments posted an increase in the third quarter following the previous quarter's decline.
In this period, exports of goods and services rose on a quarterly basis while imports of goods and services decreased, with net exports contributing positively to quarterly growth.
Therefore, expenditure composition of growth remained balanced.
In October, the retail sales volume index recorded a moderate monthly increase of 0.2% while the quarterly growth rate lost momentum, although it remains positive.
Meanwhile, the retail sales volume edged down on a monthly basis when food is excluded.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index declined on a monthly basis.
The services production index, which provides insight into both the production of services and their demand, posted a limited increase of 0.2% in October.
After recording a decline during the previous two quarters, the automobile and white goods sales have shown signs of improvement, with sales increasing in the last quarter.
In October and November, the monthly increase in card spending was below the average of the previous quarter.
The data for the first two weeks of December imply that this moderate course continues.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that domestic market orders increased in the fourth quarter, but remain below their historical average.
Accordingly, indicators for the last quarter suggest that domestic demand, standing at disinflationary levels, continues to slow down.
In October, the industrial production index decreased by 0.9% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and by 3.1% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production fell by 0.4% in the fourth quarter as of October, following a 4.1% and 1.3% decline in the second and third quarters, respectively.
Excluding the typically volatile sectors, industrial production posted a limited increase in quarterly terms.
Accordingly, the data as of October indicate a recovery trend in industrial production, albeit at a slower pace.
In line with this trend, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate increased in November after a decline in October and remained flat in December.
In October, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 33.0 million people, growing by 0.7% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up by 0.4 percentage points quarter-on-quarter while the unemployment rate stood at 8.8%.
Survey indicators suggest a relatively weak outlook in manufacturing firms' future employment expectations, despite an improvement in the last quarter.
In October, the current account balance posted a monthly surplus of USD 1.9 billion while contributing to the reduction in the 12-month cumulative current account deficit to USD 7.7 billion.
The improvement in the cumulative current account balance in October was driven by the decline in the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy.
On the other hand, the 12- month cumulative energy trade deficit remained relatively flat while the gold trade deficit increased compared to the previous month.
During this period, the 12-month cumulative services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 60.1 billion.
In November, provisional foreign trade data pointed to a decline in exports and an increase in imports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
The 12-month cumulative figures reveal that the foreign trade deficit rose compared to the previous month.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to widen in November.
Gold imports amounted to USD 2.1 billion in November, and to USD 16.7 billion in cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods declined in the third quarter compared to the previous quarter, but increased again in October and November.
Excluding the jewelry imports, which has recently contributed significantly to the rise in consumption goods imports, the consumption goods imports appear to have a flatter outlook.
When the provisional foreign trade data for November is considered along with the high-frequency leading data for December, the three-month average trends point to a sustained strength in exports and an increase in imports.
These trends imply an increase in consumption goods imports in December while suggesting a possible monthly decline when jewelry imports are excluded.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio stood at around 139% in October.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 113%.
In November, consumer prices were up by 2.24% while annual inflation fell by 1.49 percentage points to 47.09%.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 1.42 and 0.62 percentage points to 45.68% and 47.13%, respectively.
The contribution to annual inflation was down in energy, services, and alcohol-tobacco-gold groups, whereas the contribution of core goods remained unchanged and that of the food group increased.
Accordingly, the impact of food prices on consumer inflation came to the fore in November while inflation excluding food was relatively more favorable.
Meanwhile, a gradual slowdown is observed in the seasonally adjusted monthly consumer inflation excluding food.
While core goods inflation remained low, the monthly price increase in services was mild.
In November, the services sector recorded the lowest monthly rate of increase in the last three years.
The food group pushed monthly consumer inflation up in November with a strong price increase triggered by unprocessed food for the second consecutive month.
As a matter of fact, monthly consumer inflation excluding food was lower at 1.34% in this period.
Meanwhile, energy prices followed a mild course in November.
The underlying trend of inflation was essentially flat in November.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases rose by a narrow margin in the B and C indices compared to the previous month.
In this period, among the components of the B index, price increases lost pace in processed food, but remained almost flat in services and accelerated somewhat in core goods.
Neither of the distribution-based and the model-based underlying inflation indicators, on the other hand, posted a noticeable change over the previous month.
As of November, the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months was 1.7% in core goods while this rate has weakened compared to the previous month and materialized as 3.5% in services.
Meanwhile, it remained below 3% in services excluding rent.
The prevalent price-setting behavior in the services sector leads to significant inertia and causes the impact of shocks on inflation to extend over a long time period.
Services prices saw a relatively modest increase of 1.61% in November after a long period of significant increases.
Although the rent group posted a relatively high monthly increase, it has slowed down compared to the previous month, and monthly inflation in services excluding rents materialized at 0.90%.
This can mainly be attributed to the relative price adjustment in items with time-dependent price setting coming virtually to end as well as the favorable outlook in services items that are relatively more demand-sensitive.
This outlook was also driven by seasonal factors.
Prices of transport services remained relatively flat (0.33%) in November on the back of reduced mobility.
Monthly rent inflation eased in November due to falling contract renewal rates as well as the lower rate of rent increase in contracts.
Monthly inflation in the restaurants-hotels subgroup weakened significantly by 0.79% as the monthly price increase in catering services slowed, and accommodation prices further declined.
The mild increase in prices of other services (0.97%) in November pointed to a continued slowdown in this subgroup.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that monthly rent inflation will ease in December.
In addition to the falling contract renewal rate due to seasonal effects, the reference rate of rent increases in new and renewed contracts is also on a downtrend.
Rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI) and are decreasing.
Producer price increases weakened significantly.
Domestic producer prices rose by 0.66% in November, and annual inflation dropped by 2.77 percentage points to 29.47%, maintaining its downward trend.
In this period, capital and intermediate goods and energy curbed headline producer inflation while food production and medicine prices were the main drivers of the price increases in non-durable consumption goods.
International commodity prices fell in November, led by the energy sector.
The monthly rise in the FAO food prices index in September extended into November, albeit at a slower pace.
Commodity prices remained relatively flat in the first half of December.
Across subgroups, commodity prices receded in energy but rose in agriculture.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 74.4 on average in November, remained volatile, due in part to geopolitical developments, and are approximately at USD 74.0 in the first half of December.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained almost flat and hovered slightly below its historical average in November.
The downtrend in container indices for the globe and China, which was seen after July, was replaced by a rise in November while the downtrend in dry cargo transport indices, which started after October, continued.
The basket exchange rate displayed a limited decrease in November.
In this period, the seasonally adjusted PMI data point to a slowdown in input and goods prices in the manufacturing industry.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in December, inflation expectations displayed a partial rise.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation decreased by 0.1 percentage points to 27.1% while inflation expectations for the end of the current year and the next year were revised upwards by 0.5 and 0.9 percentage points to 45.3% and 27.1%, respectively.
The 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was up by 0.1 percentage points to 18.5%.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.3%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of firms, which was 47.8% in November, declined by 0.2 percentage points to 47.6% in December.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of households fell by 1.0 percentage points to 63.1%.
Leading indicators point to weakening consumer inflation in December.
While core goods inflation remains low, the improvement in services inflation has become more apparent.
The monthly price increases have been decelerating both in rent and service prices excluding rent.
Unprocessed food inflation appears to have moderated in December after an elevated course in the previous two months.
Leading indicators suggest that supply-side pressures on fresh fruit and vegetable prices faded in December.
Against this backdrop, leading indicators point to a decline in the underlying trend in December.
The Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 50 percent to 47.5 percent.
The Committee has also decided to adjust the monetary policy operational framework by setting the Central Bank overnight borrowing and lending rates 150 basis points below and above the one-week repo auction rate, respectively.
The decisiveness regarding tight monetary stance is bringing down the underlying trend of monthly inflation and strengthening the disinflation process through moderation in domestic demand, real appreciation in Turkish lira, and improvement in inflation expectations.
Going forward, increased coordination of fiscal policy will also contribute significantly to this process.
The tight monetary stance will be maintained until a significant and sustained decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation is observed and inflation expectations converge to the projected forecast range.
The Committee will make its decisions prudently on a meeting-by-meeting basis with a focus on the inflation outlook.
Liquidity conditions are closely monitored and assessed with respect to prospective developments.
The limited improvement in global growth continued in the last quarter of 2024 while the normalization trend seen in the labor market supply-demand balance was maintained.
The growth rate is expected to be close to its historical average at 2.2% in 2025.
Heightened uncertainties regarding global economic and trade policies, as well as geopolitical developments are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity.
While advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, there is an increasing expectation that central banks will adopt a more cautious approach in their rate cuts due to the recent heightened global uncertainties.
Portfolio outflows from EMEs’ markets were recorded in this period.
Deposit rates fell by 282 basis points compared to the week ending December 27, and stood at 52.9% as of January 17.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 212 basis points to 53.5%.
Retail loan rates for general-purpose loans (excluding overdraft accounts) declined by 178 basis points to 68.3% while housing loan rates decreased by 46 basis points to 40.4%.
Vehicle loan rates were 47.3% as of January 17.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans remained flat after December 27 and stood at 3.5% on January 17.
In this period, credit cards recorded a limited increase while the growth rates of general-purpose loans, housing loans, and vehicle loans slightly declined.
In the same period, TRY commercial loans rose from an average four-week growth rate of 1.4% to 2.3%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates edged down from 2.3% of the previous MPC meeting period to 2.2%.
On January 4, 2025, the CBRT introduced changes to the loan growth-based reserve requirement to ensure that the loan growth and composition are in line with the disinflation path.
Accordingly, the monthly growth limit for foreign currency commercial loans was reduced from 1.5% to 1% while the 2% monthly growth limit for Turkish lira commercial loans was differentiated as 2.5% for SME loans and 1.5% for other commercial loans.
As part of the strategy to phase out FX-protected deposit accounts (KKM accounts), longer- term maturities for new and renewed accounts have been discontinued.
Accordingly, the CBRT decided to terminate the opening and renewal of FX-protected deposit and participation accounts -converted from FX and gold- with maturities of six months and 12 months as of January 20, 2025.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT rose by USD 8.2 billion since December 27 to USD 163.3 billion as of January 17, 2025.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 265 basis points on January 22, 2025, posting a slight increase since December 27.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira fell to 9.2% as of January 22 while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility dropped to 18.2%.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.3 billion, comprising USD 1.6 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 0.3 billion of outflows from the stock market.
In November, the retail sales volume index recorded a monthly increase of 1.9% while the quarterly growth rate slightly lost momentum, although it remains positive.
Meanwhile, the quarterly increase in retail sales volume was more moderate when gold is excluded.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index posted a weaker monthly increase compared to the retail sales volume.
The services production index, which provides insight into both the production of services and their demand, posted a decrease of 0.2% in November.
Services production, which edged up by 0.2% on a quarterly basis, fell on an annual basis.
After recording a decline during the previous two quarters, the automobile and white goods sales have shown signs of improvement, with sales increasing in the last quarter of 2024.
The monthly increase in card spending was below the average of the previous quarter in October and November, but increased slightly in December.
The data for the first two weeks of January point to a monthly decline in card spending.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that domestic market orders increased in the last quarter of 2024, albeit declining in December, but remain below their historical average.
Accordingly, when the data on the demand for goods and services are evaluated as a whole, indicators for the last quarter suggest that domestic demand stands at disinflationary levels.
In November, the industrial production index increased by 2.9% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and by 1.5% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production rose by 1.1% in the fourth quarter as of November, following a 4% and 1.3% decline in the second and third quarters, respectively.
Excluding the typically volatile sectors, industrial production posted a more limited increase in quarterly terms.
Accordingly, the data as of November indicate a recovery trend in industrial production.
Survey indicators for the manufacturing industry point to a sustained improvement in the manufacturing sector activity.
Still buoyed by the quake-driven construction activities, the index of production in construction rose by 1.3% in quarterly terms in November, and by 8.8% compared to the October-November period of the previous year.
In November, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.7 million people, growing by 0.5% on a quarterly basis.
The labor force participation rate went up by 0.2 percentage points quarter-on-quarter while the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 8.7% in the last quarter as of November.
Survey indicators suggest an outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations in the last quarter.
In November, the current account balance posted a monthly deficit of USD 2.9 billion while the 12-month cumulative current account deficit stood at USD 7.4 billion, with a limited month-on-month increase of USD 0.2 billion.
These figures were mainly led by rising services balance despite the widening energy and gold deficits.
In fact, during this period, the 12- month cumulative services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 60.9 billion.
In December, provisional foreign trade data pointed to an uptick both in exports and imports, with stronger increase in exports, in seasonally adjusted terms.
The 12-month cumulative data reveal that the foreign trade deficit rose compared to the previous month.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to widen in December.
Gold imports amounted to USD 2 billion in December, and to USD 17.1 billion in cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods declined in the third quarter compared to the previous quarter, but increased again in the last quarter.
Excluding the jewelry imports, which has recently contributed significantly to the rise in consumption goods imports, the increase in the last quarter was less pronounced.
When the provisional foreign trade data for December is considered along with the high-frequency leading data for January, the three- month average trends point to a sustained strength in exports with a mild increase and an upswing in imports.
High-frequency data imply a decline in jewelry imports in January while suggesting a possible monthly uptick in consumption goods imports when jewelry imports are excluded.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio hovered around 134% in November.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 111%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remained high.
In December, consumer prices were up by 1.03% while annual inflation fell by 2.71 percentage points and ended the year at 44.38%.
The slowdown in food inflation led by fresh fruits and vegetables played a major role in the fall in monthly consumer inflation.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 1.74 and 1.79 percentage points to 43.94% and 45.34%, respectively.
In this period, the contribution to annual inflation was down across all main groupings, with food and services in the lead.
Meanwhile, monthly consumer inflation registered a slowdown in seasonally adjusted terms.
While core goods inflation remained mild, the monthly price increase in services became more apparent in December.
Monthly inflation in the food group lost momentum significantly due also to the replacement of strong price increases in fresh fruits and vegetables by a slight fall in the last couple of months.
Across subgroups, the mild increase in unprocessed food prices was driven mainly by fresh fruits and vegetables.
Monthly inflation in processed food recorded a month-on-month increase, which was led by certain cereal products as well as items affected also by international commodity price hikes such as fats- oils, confectionary-chocolate, cacao and coffee.
Meanwhile, energy prices remained on a mild track in December.
The underlying trend of inflation decreased in December.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases recorded a decline in the B and C indices compared to the previous month.
In this period, among the components of the B index, price increases decelerated in core goods and services but accelerated somewhat in processed food.
The distribution-based and the model-based indicators also point to a decline in the underlying trend of inflation in December.
As of December, the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months remained flat with 1.72% in core goods while this rate has weakened compared to the previous month and materialized as 3.21% in services.
Meanwhile, it declined to 2.82% in services excluding rent.
The slowdown in services prices, which had displayed significant increases for a long time, in the preceding two months, became more visible in December, and services prices saw a modest increase of 1.05% in this period.
Monthly rent inflation fell to 2.89% due to the seasonal decline in contract rates as well as lower rate of rent increase in contracts, and thus has recorded the lowest monthly rate of increase since February 2023.
Monthly inflation in services excluding rents also remained relatively low at 0.52%.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, while catering inflation increased slightly compared to the previous month, accommodation prices decreased, and thus the group’s monthly inflation remained mild at 1.35%.
The transportation sector, where prices fell (-3.02%) due to air and intercity road passenger transport, stood out in the services group.
In the other services group, price increases also remained mild.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that monthly rent inflation will increase significantly in January.
Despite the slowdown in the rate of increase in new and renewed contracts, the higher seasonal rise seen in contact renewal rates is expected to drive the monthly rent inflation up.
Meanwhile, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI).
Domestic producer prices rose by 0.40% in December, and annual inflation dropped by 0.95 percentage points, ending the year at 28.52%.
In this period, across main industrial groupings, prices of durable and non-durable goods increased while energy prices decreased, and intermediate goods posted a moderate rise.
The low course in producer inflation affects prices of goods favorably for consumers.
In December, international commodity prices remained relatively moderate.
The monthly rise in the FAO food prices index in September was replaced by a decline in December.
Meanwhile, commodity prices increased in the first half of January.
Across subgroups, commodity prices posted a mild increase in agriculture but rose significantly in energy.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 73.8 on average in December, climbed to USD 79.8 on average in the first 20 days of January, due in part to geopolitical developments.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained slightly below its historical average in December.
Container indices for the globe and China increased in December while the downtrend in dry cargo transport indices, which started after October, continued.
The basket exchange rate displayed a limited increase in December.
In this period, the seasonally adjusted PMI data point to an increase in input prices and a slow-down in goods prices in the manufacturing industry.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in January, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 remained unchanged at 27.1%.
The inflation expectation for end-2026, on the other hand, edged up by 0.2 percentage points to 18.7%, while expectations declined for other terms.
The 12-month and 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were revised down by 1.7 percentage points and 0.8 percentage points to 25.4% and 17.7%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.0%, down by 0.3 percentage points.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of firms, which was 47.8% in November, declined by 0.2 percentage points to 47.6%.
Provisional data suggest that the slowdown in real sector expectations extended into January.
In December, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of households fell by 0.9 percentage points to 63.1%.
Leading indicators point to an increase in the underlying trend of inflation in January, in line with the projections.
This increase is mainly driven by services items with time-dependent pricing and backward indexation.
Additionally, wage increases and administered price and lump-sum tax adjustments were also influential.
Core goods inflation, however, remains relatively low.
Monthly food inflation is anticipated to resume its uptrend in January, led by processed food prices.
In the energy group, while the effect of the lump-sum tax adjustment remained considerably limited, price increases have become more pronounced largely due to global commodity price developments.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 47.5% to 45%.
The decisiveness regarding tight monetary stance is strengthening the disinflation process through moderation in domestic demand, real appreciation in Turkish lira, and improvement in inflation expectations.
The tight monetary stance will be maintained until price stability is achieved via a sustained decline in inflation.
Accordingly, the policy rate will be determined in a way to ensure the tightness required by the projected disinflation path taking into account realized and expected inflation, and the underlying trend.
Liquidity conditions will be closely monitored and sterilization tools will continue to be used effectively with additional measures.
Accordingly, all monetary policy tools will be used decisively.
Increased protectionism in global trade and uncertainties regarding trade policies have recently affected the global growth outlook negatively.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is forecasted to grow by 2.1% in 2025, and by 2.4% in 2026.
Although the projection of a gradual recovery in Türkiye’s foreign demand holds, this is expected to take place later than it was in January.
The growth trend of US economy continued to diverge positively from other advanced economies.
The global demand outlook, increased protectionism, supply-side factors, and geopolitical risks lead commodity prices to follow a volatile course.
Global inflation has recently remained flat.
Rigidity in services inflation persists, and protectionist tendencies in trade policies have exacerbated upside risks to inflation.
While advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, central banks are expected to maintain their cautious approach in rate cuts due to the recent heightened global uncertainties.
Portfolio outflows from EME equity markets continued in this period.
Deposit rates tracked the policy rate cut and fell by 178 basis points compared to the week ending January 24, and stood at 50.1% as of February 28.
In the same period, Turkish lira (TRY) commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 588 basis points to 48.5%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) declined by 233 basis points to 64.8% while housing loan rates fell by 60 basis points to 39.9%, and vehicle loan rates by 318 basis points to 36.8%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans were down to 2.7% in the January 24- February 28 period.
During this period, there was a decline in the growth of all retail loan sub- components.
TRY commercial loans fell from an average four-week growth rate of 2.3% to 1.7%.
The average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates edged down from 2.2% of the previous MPC meeting period to 2.0%.
Taking into account recent developments in FX loans, the CBRT revised the loan growth-based reserve requirement practice on March 1, 2025, to support its tight monetary stance.
Accordingly, the monthly growth limit for FX loans was reduced from 1% to 0.5% while the scope of FX loans exempted from the growth limit was narrowed.
As part of the strategy to phase out FX-protected deposit accounts (KKM accounts), the CBRT decided to terminate the opening and renewal of KKM accounts (including YUVAM accounts) as of February 15, 2025.
Besides, KKM accounts held by legal entities were excluded from the targets for KKM accounts’ renewal and transition to TRY.
The reserve requirement ratios were raised to strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism on February 4, 2025.
Accordingly, among banks’ TRY liabilities with maturities up to one year (including one year), the reserve requirement ratios have been raised from 8% to 12% for of funds from repo transactions abroad, loans obtained from abroad, and deposits (participation funds) from banks abroad.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT rose by USD 6.2 billion since January 24 to USD 173.7 billion as of February 28.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 255 basis points on March 5, posting a slight decline since January 22.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira fell to 9.1% as of March 5 while the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility dropped to 17.3%.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 0.8 billion, comprising USD 0.3 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market, and USD 0.5 billion to the stock market.
The effects of monetary policy stance on credit and deposit markets as well as on domestic demand are closely monitored.
Gross domestic product (GDP) data indicated a recovery in economic activity in the last quarter of 2024, following slightly negative growth rates in the preceding quarters.
In this period, demand brought forward due to campaigns and upcoming wage revisions helped household demand for goods to remain robust.
As a result, private consumption made a positive contribution to growth.
There was a quarterly increase in goods and services imports against a quarterly decrease in exports, turning the contribution of net exports to growth negative.
In the last quarter of the year, the balanced course of the demand composition deteriorated slightly.
As the contribution of domestic demand to growth declined noticeably throughout the year, the positive contribution of net exports stood out.
In December, the retail sales volume index recorded monthly and quarterly increases of 0.4% and 4.2%, respectively.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index increased by 4.7% month-on-month and by 4.0% quarter-on-quarter.
The services production index, which provides insight into both the production of services and their demand, increased by 1.2% in December.
In quarterly terms, having narrowed in the previous two quarters, the index registered a limited increase of 1%.
Accordingly, although domestic demand was above projections in the fourth quarter, it remained at disinflationary levels.
Leading indicators suggest that domestic demand remains disinflationary in the first quarter.
In fact, current demand indicators for the first quarter show signs of a milder trend for consumption expenditures after the increase in the previous quarter.
Having risen in the last quarter of 2024, card spending trended down in monthly terms in January and February.
Automobile and white goods sales continued to post a limited quarter-on-quarter growth in the first quarter.
In the same period, survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that domestic market orders posted a moderate increase, but remained below their historical averages.
In December, the industrial production index increased by 5.0% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and by 7.0% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production rose by 3.4% in the fourth quarter, following a 3.9% and 1.0% decline in the second and third quarters, respectively.
The typically volatile sectors also had an impact on the robust increase in industrial production in December.
Excluding these sectors from the general index in order to monitor the underlying trend, the monthly and quarterly rise in industrial production were more moderate at 2.1% and 1.5%, respectively.
Survey indicators for the manufacturing industry point to a flat outlook in the underlying trend of industrial production in the first quarter of 2025.
Despite the recent volatility stemming from sector-specific developments in sectors such as oil and vehicles, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization remains relatively flat when these factors are excluded.
Meanwhile, the index of production in construction, still buoyed by the quake-driven construction activities, rose by 4.5% in quarterly terms in the last quarter of 2024, and by 11.1% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In the fourth quarter of 2024, seasonally adjusted employment was at 32.8 million people and increased by 0.4% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate remained flat while the unemployment rate decreased by 0.1 percentage points to 8.6%.
In January, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.5 million people, declining by 0.7% on a quarterly basis.
In the same period, the labor force participation rate went down by 0.5 percentage points quarter-on-quarter, and the unemployment rate fell to 8.4% in the first quarter as of January.
Survey indicators suggest an outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations in the first quarter of 2025.
In December, the current account balance posted a monthly deficit of USD 4.7 billion while the 12-month cumulative current account deficit stood at USD 10.0 billion, with a month-on- month increase of USD 3.0 billion.
These figures were mainly led by the widening energy and gold deficits, as well as foreign trade deficits excluding energy and gold, despite the rising services balance surplus.
In fact, during this period, the 12-month cumulative services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 62.0 billion.
In January, seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a decline.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to widen in January.
Gold imports amounted to USD 1.5 billion in January, and to USD 17.6 billion in cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods declined month-on- month, yet continued to hover above historical averages.
Excluding the jewelry imports, which have recently contributed significantly to the rise in consumption goods imports, consumption goods imports edged up compared to the previous month.
When the foreign trade data for January is considered along with the provisional data for February, the three- month average trends point to a sustained strength in exports with a mild increase and a flat course in imports.
Provisional data imply a moderate level of jewelry imports in February and a decline in consumption goods imports excluding jewelry on a monthly basis.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio hovered around 141% in January.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 117%.
In February, consumer prices were up by 2.27% while annual inflation fell by 3.07 percentage points and stood at 39.05%.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 2.61 and 2.44 percentage points to 39.47% and 40.21%, respectively.
Contributions to annual inflation were down across all main groups.
Meanwhile, monthly consumer inflation receded in seasonally adjusted terms while all main expenditure groups recorded a slowdown.
In February, core goods inflation remained relatively low while services inflation slowed down after the idiosyncratic increase in January.
Prices of core goods fell in February, led by clothing and footwear.
Prices of durable goods and other core goods remained mild.
Monthly price increases in other main groups, particularly in services group, lost pace compared to January.
Services inflation was mainly shaped by the largely realized idiosyncratic and time-dependent price increases in January, as well as the impact of the revisions to the Communiqué on Healthcare Implementation (SUT).
The impact of the revised SUT on monthly consumer inflation was upward by 0.56 percentage points in January and downward by 0.29 percentage points in February.
The revised medical examination copayment had a total impact on annual consumer inflation of 0.34 percentage points.
In February, food prices increased by more than 3%, driven by processed food prices.
Across subgroups, the decline in vegetable prices in the unprocessed food group stood out.
In this period, red meat prices strengthened also due to the idiosyncratic factors related to Ramadan.
In February, monthly inflation in processed food was high at 4.70%.
While bread, milk and dairy, and processed meat products had a significant impact on this development, the increases were broad-based.
Energy prices increased by 3.58% in February, mainly driven by the rise in electricity prices (10.70%) due to the transition to the End-Source Supply Tariff (ESST).
Following the increase in January, the underlying trend of inflation decreased in February.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases in the B and C indices slowed down compared to the previous month.
During this period, price increases weakened for all components of the B index, albeit limited in processed food.
The distribution-based and the model-based indicators also point to a decline in the underlying trend of inflation in February while distribution-based indicators such as Median and SATRIM registered lower values.
As of February, the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months remained flat in services (4.10%) and services excluding rents (3.72%) with the effect of developments in January.
Meanwhile, this rate in core goods decreased compared to the previous month and stood at 1.59%.
Against this background, services inflation remains higher than goods inflation.
Having slowed down in the final quarter of 2024, services inflation increased in January due to the effects of items with time-dependent pricing as well as the SUT regulation.
However, in February, with these effects largely dissipated and the new SUT regulation in place, the monthly services inflation rate fell significantly to 3.61%.
Due to the seasonal decline in contract renewal rates as well as lower rate of rent increase in contracts, the monthly rent inflation rate fell to 5.24 %, which is still high.
Monthly inflation in services excluding rents also decreased and was recorded at 3.16%.
In this period, seasonally-adjusted monthly inflation in transport and communication services increased month-on-month while decelerated in the remaining subgroups, more markedly in the other services.
The slowdown in the other services inflation was mainly driven by the impact of the SUT regulation while the uptrend in education services continued due to private school fees.
The micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) show that in February, contract renewal rates decreased due to seasonal effects while the rate of increase in rents in new and renewed contracts is on a downtrend.
Meanwhile, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI) and the downtrend continues.
In February, domestic producer prices rose by 2.12%, and annual inflation continued the downtrend dropping by 1.99 percentage points to 25.21%.
Thus, producer inflation came down to the lowest levels that has been recorded since 2021.
Across main industrial groupings, the energy group curbed headline producer inflation in February while other main groups recorded monthly price increases of more than 2%, mainly due to developments in employee costs and the Turkish lira.
The recent relatively low course of producer inflation affects prices of goods favorably for consumers.
In February, international commodity prices remained relatively moderate.
Across subcategories, the rise in non-energy commodity prices was offset by a decline in energy prices driven by developments in Brent oil.
The rise in agricultural commodity prices over the last six months is remarkable.
In the FAO food price index, which has a broader content, saw the monthly increases observed since September replaced by a decline in December and January, led by vegetable oil and sugar subgroups.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 79.2 on averaged in January, dropped to USD 75.2 on average in February.
The recent trend in oil prices indicates two-way risks, with the downside risks being more pronounced.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained slightly below its historical average in January.
Container indices for the globe and China decreased in February while dry cargo transport indices displayed a varying outlook.
In February, the basket exchange rate increased, more pronounced in the euro rate.
In February, the seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data point to an increase both in input prices and goods prices.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in February, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 increased by 1.3 percentage points to 28.3%.
The inflation expectation for end-2026 was revised by 0.4 percentage points to 19.1% while expectations declined for other terms.
The 12-month and 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were revised down by 0.1 percentage points and 0.5 percentage points to 25.3% and 17.3%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation remained flat and was measured at 11.0%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of firms, which was 43.8% in January, declined by 1.9 percentage points to 41.9% in February.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of households increased by 0.4 percentage points to 59.2%.
The March Market Participants Survey was published after the MPC decision.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 45% to 42.5%.
The Committee will adjust the policy rate prudently on a meeting-by-meeting basis with a focus on the inflation outlook.
Considering the recent developments in credit growth, additional measures were taken to preserve macro financial stability and to support the tight monetary policy stance.
Liquidity conditions will continue to be closely monitored and sterilization tools will continue to be used effectively.
Summary of the Interim .
Amid the recent volatility in financial markets, Türkiye’s five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium reached 296 basis points as of March 20, up by 38 basis points from its level at the time of the .
Committee (the Committee) meeting of March 6.
In the same period, the one- month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira increased by 10.3 percentage points to 19%, and the 12-month implied exchange rate volatility rose by 4.0 percentage points to 21.5%.
Measures to Stabilize Markets and .
The Committee convened to exchange views on the recent financial market developments.
Assessing the risks that these developments may pose to the inflation outlook, measures have been taken to support the tight monetary stance.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to raise the Central Bank overnight lending rate to 46% from 44%.
The policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate), and the Central Bank overnight borrowing rate were kept at 42.5% and 41%, respectively.
Furthermore, TL and FX liquidity measures have been introduced to limit market volatility.
The CBRT began to conduct TL-settled foreign exchange forward selling transactions to ensure the sound functioning of the foreign exchange market, to prevent possible volatilities in exchange rates and to stabilize foreign exchange liquidity.
Additionally, to strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism and support the tight monetary stance, the CBRT decided to suspend the one-week repo auctions for a period of time, and decided to issue liquidity bills with maturities up to 91 days.
In order to maintain the sound functioning of financial markets, additional actions will be taken if deemed necessary.
The proactive steps taken in this period targeting a reduction in volatility of asset prices aim at limiting the upside risks to the inflation outlook.
In pursuit of its primary objective of price stability, the CBRT will continue to use all the tools at its disposal effectively and decisively within market mechanism.
The monetary policy stance will be tightened in case a significant and persistent deterioration in inflation is foreseen.
Lingering uncertainties regarding global trade policies have further increased following the protectionist steps taken in the recent period, and risks to the global economy and financial markets have become pronounced.
Such developments continue to affect the global growth outlook negatively.
While growth projections for many advanced and emerging economies have been revised downwards, the growth rate expectation for the global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, has been updated from 2.1% to 1.7% for 2025, and from 2.4% to 1.9% for 2026.
The deterioration in the global demand outlook has led to sharp declines in commodity prices, most visibly in natural gas and oil.
The future course of US trade policies and possible retaliation by other countries, coupled with ongoing geopolitical risks, are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global trade and economic activity.
While the expected effects of tariff hikes on inflation may differ across countries, inflation expectations have slightly increased in advanced economies, particularly in the US.
Accordingly, it is expected that the decline in global inflation will slow down and central banks will maintain their cautious approach in rate cuts.
The risk appetite decreased markedly due to increased global uncertainties in this period, and portfolio outflows from emerging markets continued.
Turkish lira (TRY) deposit rates rose by 275 basis points compared to the week ending March 7, and stood at 51.9% as of the week ending April 11.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) increased by 449 basis points to 54.9%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) were up by 555 basis points to 69.7% while housing loan rates fell by 26 basis points to 39.6%, and vehicle loan rates rose by 26 basis points to 43.0%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans was down to 2.3% in the March 7-April 11 period.
This decline resulted from the deceleration in credit card growth while there was a rise in the growth of all consumer loan subcomponents during this period.
The average four- week growth rate of TRY commercial loans increased to 3.6% from 1.7%.
Consistent with the 0.5% growth limit applied to foreign currency (FX) loans, the average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates dropped from the 2.0% level of the previous MPC meeting period to 0.4%.
With a decision taken on March 28, a type of general-purpose loan to consumers, namely the overdraft loans, which were exempt from the loan growth limits were started to be included under the loan growth-based reserve requirement practice, conditional on having, more than three installments (excluding expenditures on education and training).
Additionally, the scope of investment loans exempted from the FX loan growth limit was revised.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT decreased by USD 22.4 billion since March 7 to USD 147.5 billion as of April 11.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium reached 343 basis points on April 16, posting an increase since March 5.
The one-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 18.9% as of April 16 while the 12- month implied exchange rate volatility increased to 26.1%.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio outflows have totaled USD 7.5 billion, comprising USD 6.3 billion of outflows from the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.1 billion from the stock market.
In February, the retail sales volume index recorded monthly and quarterly increases of 1.1% and 3.7%, respectively.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index increased by 2.5% month-on-month and by 0.8% quarter-on-quarter.
The services production index, which provides insight into both the production of services and their demand, decreased by 2.0% in February.
On a quarterly basis, following a rise of 0.9% in the last quarter of the previous year, the index went up by 2.9% in the first quarter of the year.
After declining in January, card spending showed a limited recovery in February and picked up in March, especially in the second half of the month due to the seasonally increased demand in the run-up to Eid al- Fitr.
Limited data for the first week of April suggest a monthly decline and a flat quarterly outlook.
White goods sales declined in the first quarter while automobile sales remained on the rise, albeit at a slower pace.
In the same period, survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that domestic market orders posted a slight increase below the previous quarter's rise.
Accordingly, leading indicators point to a level of domestic demand above projections despite some loss of momentum in the first quarter, suggesting a lower disinflationary impact.
In February, the industrial production index decreased by 1.6% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects and by 1.9% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production rose by 0.9% in the first quarter as of February.
Excluding typically volatile sectors in order to monitor the underlying trend, the fall in industrial production in February was more moderate at 1.1% while the quarterly increase of 1.5% outpaced the rise in the main index.
In this period, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate dropped by 0.5 percentage points quarter-on-quarter.
Meanwhile, the index of production in construction, still buoyed by the quake-driven construction activities, rose by 10.3% in quarterly terms in the first quarter of the year as of February and by 13.8% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In February, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.3 million people, declining by 1% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went down by 0.7 percentage points quarter-on-quarter, and the unemployment rate fell by 0.3 percentage points to 8.3% in the first quarter as of February Survey indicators suggest an outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations in the first quarter of 2025.
In February, the current account balance posted a monthly deficit of USD 4.4 billion while the 12-month cumulative current account deficit stood at USD 12.8 billion, with a month-on- month increase of USD 1.1 billion.
These figures were mainly led by the widening gold and energy trade deficits, despite the rising services balance surplus.
The announcement of additional tariffs to be imposed by the US in early April and the subsequent developments significantly increased the uncertainty regarding trade policies.
These developments have created some uncertainty on Türkiye's foreign trade deficit through channels such as the weakening in global growth, the resulting decline in energy and commodity prices, increased competition in foreign markets, and the rise in parity in favor of the euro.
In March, seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted an increase.
The rise in exports was more robust as deliveries were brought forward in the run-up to Eid al-Fitr.
The 12- month cumulative data reveal that the foreign trade deficit posted a limited decline compared to the previous month.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to narrow in March.
Gold imports amounted to USD 1.6 billion in March and to USD 18.5 billion in cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods, which had declined in the previous two months, rebounded in March and remained above historical averages.
Excluding the jewelry imports, which have recently contributed significantly to the rise in consumption goods imports, consumption goods imports increased slightly compared to the previous month.
When the foreign trade data for March is considered along with the high-frequency leading data for April, the three-month average trends point to a flat course in exports due to the end of the holiday-related volatility, and a limited increase in imports.
High-frequency data imply a more moderate level of jewelry imports and a flat course in consumption goods imports excluding jewelry on a monthly basis in April.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio hovered around 152% in February.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 130%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remain at high levels, nevertheless debt rollover ratios may decline in the upcoming period as FX-denominated borrowing declines and economic activity slows down.
In March, consumer prices were up by 2.46% while annual inflation fell by 0.95 percentage points and stood at 38.10%.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 2.48 and 2.79 percentage points to 36.99% and 37.42%, respectively.
Contributions to annual inflation were up in food and alcohol-tobacco-gold groups but down in services, core goods, and energy groups.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly consumer inflation increased month-on- month driven by unprocessed food while monthly consumer inflation excluding food edged down.
Core goods inflation followed a relatively low course in March while the weakening trend in services inflation continued.
Price increases in durable consumption goods remained moderate.
Monthly inflation in the services sector slowed across subgroups while prices in transport services posted a decline.
Developments in consumer prices in March were led by the food group, and monthly inflation in this group strengthened due to unprocessed food.
This was mainly driven by the rise in fresh fruits and vegetables prices due to adverse weather conditions, while the rise in meat prices due to Ramadan was also noteworthy.
Energy prices remained flat in March, as the decline in fuel prices due to the fall in global crude oil prices was offset by the rise in municipal water prices.
The underlying trend of inflation decreased in March.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly rise in the B index weakened while that in the C index remained flat.
During this period, among the components of the B index, price increases accelerated in core goods while they slowed in services and particularly in processed food.
In March, the distribution-based and the model-based indicators point to a flat course in the median inflation, and to a decline in the other underlying trend indicators.
As of March, the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months slowed down both in core goods (1.45%) and the services sector (3.85%), compared to the previous month.
In the services excluding rents, this rate decreased to 3.48%.
Price increases in the services group, which accelerated in January due to time-dependent factors, displayed a significant downtrend in February and March.
Although the monthly rent inflation decreased to 3.39% due to the seasonal decline in contract renewal rates and the slowdown in rent increase in contracts, it is still high and it stood out among services.
Monthly inflation in services excluding rents also slowed down to 1.55%.
In this period, seasonally-adjusted monthly inflation decelerated in communication, rents, transport and restaurants-hotels groups but increased in other services sub-group compared to the previous month.
Monthly inflation in the communication services slowed down significantly while the decline in transport services prices was driven by intercity transportation.
Leading indicators monitored via the micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that the monthly rents inflation will slow down in April.
The decrease in contract renewal rates due to seasonal effects as well as the downtrend in the rate of increase in rents in new and renewed contracts continues, albeit at a slower pace.
Meanwhile, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI) and the decline continues.
In March, domestic producer prices rose by 1.88%, and annual inflation continued the downtrend dropping by 1.71 percentage points to 23.50%.
Thus, annual producer inflation came down to the lowest levels that has been recorded since 2021.
Across main industrial groupings, the energy group curbed headline producer inflation in March while other main groups recorded monthly price increases of more than 2%, mainly due to developments in the Turkish lira.
In March, international commodity prices posted a decline.
Across subcategories, prices fell both in energy and non-energy commodities, with the energy group in the lead.
Among non- energy commodities, agricultural commodity prices were notable with a decline about 6%.
On the other hand, the FAO food price index remained relatively flat in March.
The first half of April reveals a considerably accelerated decline in commodity prices led by the energy group.
Due to the expected slowdown in global economy amid the rise in tariffs and accompanying uncertainty, commodity prices, particularly crude oil, registered a significant decline.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 72.6 on average in March, fluctuated around USD 65 after April 4.
Potential effects of the rising protectionism in global trade on the disinflation process through global economic activity, commodity prices and capital flows are closely monitored.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained slightly below its historical average in March.
Container indices for the globe and China decreased in March while dry cargo transport indices recorded an uptick.
In March, the basket exchange rate increased, more apparently in the euro rate.
The seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data point to a weakening both in input prices and goods prices in March.
Recent developments in financial markets had a negative impact on inflation expectations.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in April, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 rose by 1.9 percentage points to 30.0%.
The inflation expectation for end-2026 was revised upwards by 1.2 percentage points to 20.3% and expectations increased also for other terms.
The 12-month and 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were revised by 1.0 percentage points and 0.6 percentage points to 25.6% and 17.7%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation edged up by 0.1 percentage points and was measured at 11.1%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month- ahead annual inflation expectations of firms, which were 41.9% in February, declined by 0.8 percentage points to 41.1% in March.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of households remained unchanged at 59.3%.
Inflation expectations and pricing behavior continue to pose risks to the disinflation process.
Leading indicators suggest an increase in the underlying trend of inflation for April.
Monthly core goods inflation is expected to rise slightly in April due to recent developments in financial markets, while services inflation is likely to remain relatively flat.
Durable consumption goods with high exchange rate pass-through, such as automobiles, have recorded price increases.
The seasonally adjusted services inflation, on the other hand, remains relatively flat after showing a weak trend in the recent period.
Transport prices in the services group are expected to rise in April after falling in the previous month.
Unprocessed food prices, which were high in March, remained more moderate in the first weeks of April due to the correction in vegetable prices.
However, the agricultural frost that hit the country widely in April has increased the upside risks to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables, mainly fruits, for the period ahead.
Leading indicators suggest that price increases in the other unprocessed food group continue to be driven by red meat and egg items.
In the energy group, effects of the increase in electricity tariffs for dwellings are discernible while the slowing effect on fuel prices of crude oil prices, which have declined significantly due to global developments, limited the group's price increase to some extent.
Committee (the Committee) held an Interim Meeting to evaluate the financial market developments that took place in the respective week.
Assessing the risks that these developments may pose to the inflation outlook, measures were taken to support the tight monetary stance.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to raise the Central Bank overnight lending rate to 46 % from 44%, and to keep the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) and the overnight borrowing rate at 42.5% and 41%, respectively.
Moreover, as indicated in the Interim Meeting Summary of March 27, TL and FX liquidity measures were introduced to limit market volatility.
Besides, the maturity of deposit auctions was extended up to eight weeks, liquidity tools were diversified, and it was decided to issue liquidity bills with maturities up to 91 days.
Additionally, the Bank suspended the one-week repo auctions for a period of time and provided funding mainly at overnight maturity, leading the CBRT funding cost to realize close to the overnight lending rate.
At its meeting on April 17, the Committee decided to raise the one-week repo auction rate from 42.5% to 46%.
The Committee also increased the Central Bank overnight lending rate from 46% to 49% and the overnight borrowing rate from 41% to 44.5%.
In response to the recent developments in financial markets, additional measures to support the monetary transmission mechanism were swiftly put in place.
Liquidity conditions will continue to be closely monitored and liquidity management tools will continue to be used effectively.
The CBRT decided to resume the one-week repo auctions that were suspended on March 20.
Lingering uncertainties regarding global trade policies has remained high, despite some recent easing.
Accordingly, there has been a moderate improvement in the global growth outlook.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners is projected to increase by 1.9% in 2025 and 2.2% in 2026.
Crude oil prices, which fell sharply in April due to the deterioration in the global demand outlook, have risen again owing to the recent geopolitical developments, and upside risks for energy commodity prices have increased.
Uncertainties about the trade and economic policies that the U.S. and other countries will pursue in the upcoming period and heightened geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of the global economic activity.
While the expected effects of tariff hikes on inflation may differ across countries, inflation uncertainty have increased globally.
Accordingly, it is expected that central banks will maintain their cautious approach in rate cuts.
Although there have been moderate portfolio flows into emerging markets recently, elevated levels of global uncertainties and geopolitical developments keep downside risks to portfolio flows alive.
Geopolitical developments may adversely affect the global economy through channels such as energy prices, the risk appetite, country risk premiums, and tourism.
On the back of the rise in the policy rate, Turkish lira (TRY) deposit rates rose by 334 basis points compared to the week ending April 18, and stood at 56.7% as of the week ending June 13.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) increased by 455 basis points to 60.3%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 31 basis points to 70.9% housing loan rates increased by 390 basis points to 43.5%, and vehicle loan rates rose by 302 basis points to 46.5%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans increased to 4.8% in the April 18- June 13 period.
This rise resulted from the acceleration in credit card balance growth while there was a limited rise in the growth of other retail loans.
The average four-week growth rate of TRY commercial loans decreased from 3.6% to 2.4%.
Consistent with the growth limit applied to foreign currency (FX) loans, the average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates stood at 0.5%.
In order to strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism and support transition to the Turkish lira, several changes have been made to the macroprudential framework in the current MPC period.
Reserve requirement ratios have been increased for FX deposits across all maturities; funds that are derived from FX repo transactions with residents with a maturity up to 1 year, Turkish lira-denominated funds derived from repo transactions abroad and loans obtained from abroad with maturities up to 1 year varying according to maturity.
Moreover, items exempt from loan growth limit have been changed.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 12.7 billion since April 18 and reached USD 159.3 billion as of June 13.
During the week of June 13, 2025, geopolitical developments led to an increase in the credit risk premiums and exchange rate volatility; nevertheless in the subsequent period these indicators settled slightly.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium reached 304 basis points on June 18, falling by around 40 basis points since April 16.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira declined to 12.4% and 23.0%, respectively, as of June 18.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.4 billion, comprising USD 0.1 billion of outflows from the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.5 billion of inflows to the stock market.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data pointed to a decline in annual and quarterly growth rates in the first quarter of 2025.
The services sector remained the main driver of annual growth, which was restrained by the industrial sector.
While annual growth in private consumption lost pace, total investments continued to contribute positively to annual growth.
On a quarterly basis, private consumption and total investments fell.
As exports of goods and services posted a quarterly increase and imports declined, net exports made a positive contribution to quarterly growth.
In this context, domestic demand weakened, and external balance improved in the first quarter amid ongoing tightening in financial conditions.
In April, the retail sales volume index recorded monthly and quarterly increases of 2.8% and 2.3%, respectively.
Excluding gold, milder increases were recorded in both monthly and quarterly terms.
Retail sales were down month-on-month in textiles, clothing, footwear, medical products, and cosmetics, as well as shopping online or via mail order.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index fell by 3.1% month-on-month and increased by 0.8% quarter-on-quarter.
The services production index decreased by 0.6% in April.
On a quarterly basis, following a rise of 3.4% in the first quarter of the year, the index went down in the second quarter as of April.
The increased card spending in March due to the seasonally increased demand in the run-up to Eid al-Fitr decelerated in April and May.
White goods sales picked up in April while automobile sales registered a quarterly decline in the April-May period.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that registered domestic market orders in the second quarter were below the previous quarter's level.
In sum, data for the second quarter point to a slowdown in domestic demand.
In April, the industrial production index decreased by 3.1% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects and increased by 3.3% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production dropped by 1.5% in the second quarter as of April.
Excluding typically volatile sectors, such as other transportation and similar sectors, in order to monitor the underlying trend, the fall in industrial production in monthly and quarterly terms was more moderate.
Bridge days associated with the administrative extension of the Eid al-Fitr holiday partly contributed to the monthly decline in industrial production.
Given the downward impact of typically volatile sectors as well as that of bridge days, the underlying trend of industrial production was relatively flat in April.
Survey indicators for the manufacturing industry point to continued weak activity in the manufacturing industry in the second quarter.
As of May, the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate dropped by 0.1 percentage points quarter-on-quarter.
Meanwhile, the index of production in construction declined by 3.1% in quarterly terms in the second quarter as of April but rose by 12.5% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In April, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.4 million people, declining by 0.3% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate was unchanged quarter-on- quarter, and the unemployment rate rose by 0.3 percentage points to 8.6% in the second quarter as of April.
Survey indicators suggest that the outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations will persist in the second quarter of 2025 as of May.
In April, the current account balance posted a monthly deficit of USD 7.9 billion.
12-month cumulative current account deficit stood at USD 15.8 billion, with a month-on-month increase of USD 3.0 billion.
In April, the high course of the foreign trade deficit on a monthly basis was driven both by the holiday-related volatility in foreign trade data, similar to that observed in previous years, and the partial front-loading, especially in imports, amid heightened uncertainty over global trade policies.
Thus, the gold trade deficit and the foreign trade deficit excluding gold and energy increased despite the high course of the services balance surplus.
During this period, the 12-month cumulative services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 62.0 billion.
In May, seasonally adjusted exports increased while imports posted a significant decline.
The 12-month cumulative data reveal that the foreign trade deficit was similar to the previous month.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is not projected to show a significant change in May.
Gold imports amounted to USD 2.1 billion in May and to USD 20.1 billion in cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods continued their upward trend, which began in March, in April and May.
Excluding the jewelry imports, consumption goods imports posted a limited increase in May.
When provisional foreign trade data for May is considered along with the high-frequency leading data for June, the three- month average trends point to a slight decline in exports after the sharp increase in May, and to a flat course in imports as the brought-forward imports in April amid heightened uncertainty was offset in May.
High-frequency data imply a high level of jewelry imports and a flat course in consumption goods imports excluding jewelry on a monthly basis in June, following May's trends.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio hovered around 171% in April.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 142%.
In May, consumer prices were up by 1.53% while annual inflation fell by 2.45 percentage points and stood at 35.41%.
Annual inflation in the B and C indices declined by 2.00 and 1.75 percentage points to 34.81% and 35.37%, respectively.
Contributions to annual inflation were unchanged in core goods but down in other groups.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the monthly increase in consumer prices lost pace month-on-month.
In May, developments in the Turkish lira continued to have an impact on core inflation while services inflation weakened.
Price increases in durable consumption goods waned somewhat compared to the previous month, yet remained relatively high, driven by the automobile item.
The rent sub-group stood out in services inflation while other subgroups followed a mild course.
May consumer price developments were marked by the decline in the prices of the food group, which was driven by the unprocessed food subgroup.
This decline is mainly attributed to vegetables and some other unprocessed food items despite the ongoing adverse outlook in fruit prices.
Meanwhile, energy prices increased in May due to the rise in municipal water prices coupled with the carry-over effect of the arrangement in residential electricity tariffs in April.
The underlying trend of inflation declined in May.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increase in the B and C indices recorded a decline compared to the previous month.
In this period, price increases weakened across the groups of the B index.
Both the distribution-based and the model-based indicators pointed to a decline in this period.
As of May, the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months went up to 2.02% in core goods, but slowed down in the services sector compared to the previous month and stood at 2.79%.
In the services excluding rents, this rate decreased to 2.40%.
Against this background, annual services inflation remains higher than goods inflation.
However, recent price developments indicate a gradual loss of strength in monthly services inflation.
In fact, monthly price increases in the services group weakened mostly owing to the non-rent items in May.
Amid the seasonal decline in contract renewal rates and the slowdown in rent increase in contracts, the monthly rent inflation fell to 3.10%, yet remained high in May.
Monthly inflation in services excluding rents also slowed down to 1.34%.
In this period, seasonally-adjusted monthly inflation decelerated in rents, communication, restaurants-hotels and other services groups, but increased in the transport sub-group compared to the previous month.
The mild course recorded in monthly inflation of the communication group in the last two months was maintained in May.
Leading indicators monitored via the micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that the monthly rent inflation will remain relatively flat in June and lose further momentum on an annual basis.
In May, domestic producer prices rose by 2.48%, and annual inflation rose by 0.63 percentage points to 23.13%.
Across main industrial groupings, price increases accelerated notably in the energy group, but decelerated in other groups.
In May, international commodity prices declined further.
Across subcategories, prices receded in energy commodities, but increased in non-energy commodities due mainly to industrial metals.
The decline of 2.3% in energy commodities is attributed to the Brent oil prices.
The FAO food price index also dropped somewhat in May.
However, after having decreased for a while due to the expected slowdown in global economy amid the rise in tariffs and accompanying uncertainty, commodity prices started to increase again in June with the energy group in the lead.
Brent crude oil prices, which were USD 64.2 on average in May, reached around USD 75 in mid-June as a result of the geopolitical developments.
Potential effects of the geopolitical developments and the rising protectionism in global trade on the disinflation process are closely monitored.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was slightly above its historical average in May.
The global container index remained relatively flat in May while the container index for China recorded an uptick.
These freight indices increased substantially in the first half of June, following the geopolitical developments.
In May, the basket exchange rate increased, more apparently in the euro rate.
The seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data point to a weakening both in input prices and goods prices in May.
Inflation expectations have partially improved in June.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in June, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 decreased by 0.5 percentage points to 29.9%.
The inflation expectation for end-2026 was revised downwards by 0.1 percentage points to 20.4% and expectations declined also for other terms.
The 12-month and 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were revised down by 0.5 percentage points and 0.4 percentage points to 24.6% and 17.4%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation edged down by 0.2 percentage points and was measured at 11.0%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectation of firms, which was 41.7% in April, declined by 0.7 percentage points to 41.0% in May.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation of households increased by 0.6 percentage points to 59.9%.
Leading indicators suggest that the decline in the underlying trend of inflation continues in June.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly core goods inflation is expected to lose pace in June while services inflation is likely to remain relatively flat.
Leading indicators point to a relatively limited increase in durable consumption goods, which have high exchange rate pass- through, except for white goods.
In the services group, prices of transport services are expected to rise in June driven by prices of passenger transport by road, due in part to the religious holiday.
Services items excluding transport and rents display a mild course.
In the unprocessed food group, leading indicators for the first half of June imply that the rise in fresh fruit prices, which were affected by the agricultural frost, has been offset by the fall in vegetable prices.
On the other hand, processed food inflation remains low across the group.
In the energy group, inflation is primarily led by municipal water prices as well as fuel prices due to the increase in crude oil prices.
Meanwhile, data indicate a partial decline in electricity prices driven by the End Source Supply Tariff.
Considered as a whole, leading indicators suggest that the disinflation process continues.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to keep the policy rate (the one- week repo auction rate) at 46%.
The Committee also maintained the Central Bank overnight lending rate and the overnight borrowing rate at 49% and 44.5%, respectively.
All monetary policy tools will be used effectively in case a significant and persistent deterioration in inflation is foreseen.
Committee Meeting July 31, 2025, No.
Uncertainties regarding global trade policies remain high.
However, the moderate improvement in the global growth outlook has continued.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is projected to increase by 2.0% in 2025 and 2.3% in 2026.
While the deterioration in the global demand outlook continues to weigh on crude oil prices, energy commodity prices follow a volatile course due to geopolitical developments.
Uncertainties about the trade and economic policies that the U.S. and other countries will pursue in the upcoming period and heightened geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity.
While the expected effects of tariff hikes on inflation may differ across countries, inflation uncertainty has increased globally.
Although portfolio inflows into emerging markets continue, elevated levels of global uncertainties and geopolitical developments keep downside risks to portfolio flows alive.
Due to the expectation of a policy rate cut, Turkish lira (TRY) deposit rates dropped by 175 basis points compared to the week ending June 20 and stood at 54.7% as of the week ending July 18.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 381 basis points to 55%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) declined by 338 basis points to 67.6%, and housing loan rates fell by 98 basis points to 42.6% while vehicle loan rates dropped by 17 basis points to 44.6%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans decreased to 2.7% in the June 20-July 18 period.
This decline mainly resulted from the slowdown in credit card balance growth, but the slower growth in housing and vehicle loans also had an impact.
The average four-week growth rate of TRY commercial loans increased from 2.4% to 3%.
Hovering below the growth limit applied to foreign currency (FX) loans, the average four-week growth rate of FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates stood at 0.4%.
While targets based on the share of real-person TRY deposit have been increased, a growth target has been introduced for banks with a share between 60% and 65%, as well.
The reserve requirement ratio for FX-protected deposit (KKM) accounts was raised from 33% to 40% while the minimum interest rate applicable to KKM accounts was reduced from 50% to 40% of the policy rate.
The target for the transition of KKM accounts to TRY was abolished while the total target for KKM renewals and transition to TRY was maintained.
It was made possible to open floating-rate TRY deposit accounts with maturities longer than one month.
Furthermore, the reserve requirement ratios for CPI-, PPI-, and TLREF-indexed deposits were set at 10% for all maturities.
The ratio for TRY-denominated required reserves that should be maintained for FX deposits was reduced from 4% to 2.5%.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 12.9 billion since June 20 and reached USD 168.6 billion as of July 18.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium declined to 282 basis points as of July 23.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira declined to 9.1% and 19.8%, respectively, as of July 23.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 3.7 billion, comprising USD 2.9 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 0.8 billion of inflows to the stock market.
In May, the retail sales volume index recorded monthly and quarterly increases of 1.6% and 3.1%, respectively.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index rose by 3.3% month-on- month and 3% quarter-on-quarter.
The services production index increased by 1.2% in May.
On a quarterly basis, following a rise of 3.3% in the first quarter of the year, the index edged down in the second quarter as of May.
After an increase in May, card spending remained flat in June but increased on a quarterly basis.
However, excluding the impact of the recent surge in card usage rate, consumption expenditures were more moderate.
White goods sales picked up in the April-May period while automobile sales registered a decline in the second quarter.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that registered domestic market orders in July were below the previous quarter's level.
Information on consumption expenditures from interviews with firms also confirms weak course of domestic demand.
In sum, recent data indicate that the disinflationary impact of demand conditions has strengthened.
In May, the industrial production index increased by 3.1% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects and by 4.9% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production was flat in the second quarter as of May.
Excluding typically volatile sectors, such as other transportation and similar sectors, in order to monitor the underlying trend, the rise in industrial production was more limited on a monthly basis.
However, when viewed on a quarterly basis, there was a slight downturn in industrial production.
The downward impact on production caused by the bridge days associated with the administrative extension of the Eid al-Fitr holiday in April was partially offset in May, which drove up industrial production.
Given the upward impact of typically volatile sectors and low base related to the bridge days in April, the underlying trend of industrial production was relatively flat in the second quarter as of May.
The manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate dropped by 0.3 percentage points quarter-on- quarter.
Leading data for July point to an ongoing decline in the capacity utilization rate.
Meanwhile, the index of production in construction declined by 1.1% in quarterly terms in the second quarter as of May but rose by 16.5% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In May, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.5 million people, declining by 0.1% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate was unchanged quarter-on- quarter, and the unemployment rate rose by 0.3 percentage points to 8.5%.
Survey indicators suggest that the outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations has persisted in the second quarter of 2025.
In May, the current account balance posted a monthly deficit of USD 0.7 billion, driven by the decline in the foreign trade deficit.
The 12-month cumulative current account deficit stood at USD 16 billion.
Travel revenues surpassed the previous year's level, reaching USD 5 billion on a monthly basis with the start of the holiday season.
During this period, travel revenues stood at USD 57.2 billion in 12-month cumulative terms while the services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 62.2 billion.
In June, seasonally adjusted exports decreased while imports posted an increase.
The 12- month cumulative data reveal that the foreign trade deficit widened compared to the previous month.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to rise in June.
Gold imports amounted to USD 1.6 billion in June and to USD 20.6 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods increased in the second quarter.
Excluding the jewelry imports, consumption goods imports were up both in June and throughout the quarter.
When provisional foreign trade data for June are considered along with the high-frequency leading data for July, the three-month average trends point to a flat course in exports and to a decline in imports.
High-frequency data imply a sustained high level of consumption goods imports excluding jewelry, albeit with a monthly drop in July.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio hovered around 168% in May.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 145%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remain at high levels; nevertheless, debt rollover ratios may decline in the upcoming period as FX-denominated borrowing declines and economic activity slows down.
In June, consumer prices were up by 1.37% while annual inflation fell by 0.36 percentage points to 35.05%.
The annual rate of change dropped by 0.19 percentage points to 34.62% in the B index but rose by 0.27 percentage points to 35.64% in the C index.
Contributions to annual inflation were up in core goods and energy but down in food and non-alcoholic beverages, and services.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the monthly increase in consumer prices showed no significant change compared to the previous month.
In June, monthly services inflation went up compared to previous month.
Transport services rising due to the religious holiday and fuel prices, and education and rent subitems, which have a strong tendency for backward indexation, stood out in this group.
Monthly inflation in the energy group was driven by municipal water, along with rising fuel prices following recent geopolitical developments.
While monthly inflation in core goods eased compared to the previous month, there was a relatively modest increase in durable consumption goods, which have high exchange pass-through, except for white goods.
Food prices have retreated somewhat.
In this group, unprocessed food prices fell, led by vegetables while the monthly price increase in processed food moderated.
On the other hand, the less-than-seasonal decline in fresh fruit and vegetable prices limited the drop in unprocessed food prices.
The underlying trend of inflation remained flat in June.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the monthly increase in the B index was slightly lower while the C index showed no significant change.
Across the groups of the B index, price increases slowed in core goods and processed food, but accelerated in services.
Both the distribution-based and the model-based indicators remained broadly unchanged from the previous month.
As of June, while the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months was flat in core goods (2.06%), it increased in the services sector (2.95%) compared to the previous month.
In services excluding rents, this rate edged up to 2.55%.
Service group price increases strengthened somewhat in June.
Prices in transportation services increased due to the effects of the religious holiday and fuel price developments; prices of education services, an item of the other services subgroup, rose, led by developments in private school fees, compared to the previous month.
In this period, monthly rent inflation went up due to seasonal effects stemming from contract renewal rates.
Meanwhile, monthly inflation in communications and restaurants-hotels remained relatively modest.
Leading indicators monitored via the micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that monthly rent inflation will rise due to seasonal factors, reflecting increased contract renewal rates in July, and lose further momentum on an annual basis.
Meanwhile, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI), and the decline continues.
Producer inflation has been negatively affected by recent geopolitical developments.
Domestic producer prices rose by 2.46% in June, led by energy items, and annual producer inflation picked up by 1.32 percentage points to 24.45%.
Across main industrial groupings, there were notable price increases in the energy group (8.42%) driven by geopolitical developments.
In July, international commodity prices receded somewhat.
After rising significantly in June due to geopolitical developments, energy prices remained relatively stable in July.
Meanwhile, prices in non-energy commodities fell, with agricultural commodity prices being a key driver in this course.
In June, Brent crude oil prices hovered around USD 78 due to global developments, but they retreated to an average of USD 71 by the third week of July.
Potential effects of the geopolitical developments and the rising trade protectionism on the disinflation process are closely monitored.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained close to its historical average in June.
Both the global container index and the container index for China recorded notable increases in this period, but this trend reversed in the first half of July.
In June, the basket exchange rate increased, more apparently in the euro rate.
The seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data point to a rise in input prices and a weakening in goods prices.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in July, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 decreased by 0.2 percentage points to 29.7%.
The inflation expectation for end-2026 remained unchanged.
The 12-month- and 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were revised down by 1.2 percentage points and 0.3 percentage points to 23.4% and 17.1%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation edged up by 0.2 percentage points and was measured at 11.2%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12- month-ahead annual inflation expectation of firms declined by 1.2 percentage points to 39.8% in June.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation of households decreased by 6.9 percentage points to 53.0%.
Leading indicators suggest a temporary rise in monthly inflation in July due to month-specific factors.
In this period, monthly consumer inflation has been influenced by administered prices and tax adjustments, as well as developments in services sector subitems with a strong tendency of time-dependent price-setting.
Nevertheless, the underlying trend is expected to be moderate.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly inflation in core goods and services is likely to edge up in July.
Leading indicators suggest notable price increases in furniture and automobiles, whereas a relatively mild course for other subitems among durable consumption goods.
In the services sector, in addition to rents, price developments in items with a strong tendency for time-dependent price-setting, such as communications and healthcare services, have played a significant role in this period.
In July, the energy sector has stood out with notable price increases among the main groupings.
The revised natural gas tariffs for households and lump-sum tax adjustments on fuel and bottled gas are projected to be decisive in this uptrend.
Price increases are monitored in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group in this period due to lump-sum tax adjustments.
On the other hand, food prices are expected to remain on a moderate path in July.
On the unprocessed food front, price declines in fresh fruits and seasonal products are anticipated.
In contrast, processed food inflation is expected to rise somewhat, led by the bread and cereals group.
In the light of all available data, leading indicators suggest that the disinflation process continues.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 46% to 43%.
The Committee has also lowered the Central Bank overnight lending rate from 49% to 46% and the overnight borrowing rate from 44.5% to 41.5%.
The tight monetary policy stance, which will be maintained until price stability is achieved, will support the disinflation process through moderation in domestic demand, real appreciation in Turkish lira, and improvement in inflation expectations.
Going forward, coordination of fiscal policy will contribute to this process.
The Committee will determine the policy rate by taking into account realized and expected inflation and its underlying trend in a way to ensure the tightness required by the projected disinflation path.
The step size will be reviewed prudently on a meeting-by-meeting basis with a focus on the inflation outlook.
The Committee will make its policy decisions so as to create the monetary and financial conditions necessary to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
Committee Meeting September 18, 2025, No.
The global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is projected to increase by 1.9% in 2025 and 2.3% in 2026.
While the deterioration in the global demand outlook and supply-side developments continue to weigh on crude oil prices, energy commodity prices have declined during the current MPC period.
On the other hand, non-energy commodity prices rose somewhat led by precious metal prices.
While risks to inflation remain prevalent globally, central banks continue to cut interest rates in light of these risks.
Turkish lira (TRY) deposit rates dropped by 242 basis points compared to the week ending July 25 and stood at 50.1% as of the week ending September 5, driven by expectations of a policy rate cut in September.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 265 basis points to 50.2%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 49 basis points to 65.7%, housing loan rates fell by 262 basis points to 39.3%, and vehicle loan rates dropped by 300 basis points to 42%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans rose to 3.3% in the July 25 – September 5 period.
This increase resulted from the rise in credit card growth.
The average four-week growth rate of TRY commercial loans decreased from 3% to 2.3%.
The average four-week growth rate of foreign currency (FX) commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates stood at 0.7%, above the previous MPC period level.
A series of amendments have been introduced to the macroprudential framework to support the monetary transmission mechanism during the current MPC period.
As of August 16, 2025, credit growth rates for extended loans are calculated on an eight-week cycle instead of a four- week cycle.
As of August 23, 2025, the opening and renewal of KKM accounts (excluding YUVAM accounts) have been terminated.
As of August 29, the commission rates based on renewals and transition to Turkish Lira have been discontinued.
Effective as of September 26, the commission rates applied according to the Turkish lira share have been increased from 3% to 4% for real persons, and from 1.5% to 2% for legal persons.
As per the Official Gazette of August 7, 2025, the criteria for defining small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), namely the annual net sales revenue or financial balance sheet amount, has been raised from TRY 500 million to TRY 1 billion.
Lastly, necessary amendments were made to ensure that this decision is reflected in growth limits for loans extended as of August 15, 2025.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 8.3 billion since July 25 and reached USD 180.1 billion as of September 5.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium declined since July 23, standing at 267 basis points as of September 10.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira rose to 10.4% and 20.2%, respectively, as of September 10.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, the change in non- resident investors' positions has remained limited in the stock market while net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.0 billion, almost all of which was directed towards the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market.
In the second quarter of 2025, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 4.8% year-on-year and 1.6% quarter-on-quarter, surpassing growth projections.
Concurrent with the release of second-quarter data, the Turkish Statistical Institute (TURKSTAT) introduced a major revision to national accounts system.
The revision had the greatest impact on the agricultural sector on the production side, as well as private consumption expenditures and stocks items on the expenditures side.
Several other changes were also made, such as the more effective and comprehensive use of administrative data, the overall improvement of calculation methods, and the review of models for seasonal and calendar adjustments.
Based on revised data, the services sector was the main driver of annual growth in the second quarter by the production approach while the industrial sector's contribution turned positive.
The construction sector also supported growth.
By the expenditure approach, annual growth in private consumption and total investments accelerated.
Final domestic demand made the largest contribution to annual growth.
As in the first quarter, private consumption declined in the second quarter on a quarterly basis.
Rebounding from a drop in the first quarter, total investments grew in the second quarter, driven by construction and machinery-equipment investments.
Final domestic demand thus limited quarterly growth.
Accordingly, while GDP growth was above projections in the second quarter, final domestic demand remained weak.
Meanwhile, exports declined amid global trade uncertainties and the limited recovery in the global growth outlook, and net exports had a dampening impact on growth due to brought-forward imports.
In July, the retail sales volume index recorded a monthly decrease of 0.2% and a quarterly increase of 1.2%.
Excluding gold, the index displayed a limited rise on a monthly basis and a rise close to the growth rate of the main index on a quarterly basis.
Thus, the growth rate of retail sales decelerated.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index decreased by 6.5% month-on-month and by 3.2% quarter-on-quarter, mainly due to the significant decrease in wholesale trade.
The services production index decreased by 0.5% in June.
On a quarterly basis, following a rise of 3.1% in the first quarter of the year, the index remained flat in the second quarter.
Card spending increased in the July- August period.
White goods sales decreased in the June-July period while automobile sales rose on a quarterly basis due to the acceleration in August.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that the weak course of registered domestic market orders continued in the third quarter.
In sum, recent data indicate that demand conditions are at disinflationary levels.
In the second quarter, the industrial sector’s value added increased by 6.1% year-on-year and by 2.3% quarter-on-quarter, pointing to a stronger industrial activity compared to the first quarter.
In this context, industrial value added diverged from industrial production growth that slowed in the second quarter.
During this period, the highest contributions to the quarterly increase in industrial production came from other transportation and similar sectors that typically display volatility, which may partially explain the divergence between industrial production indicators and the value-added indicator included in the GDP.
In July, the industrial production index decreased by 1.8% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and increased by 5.0% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production posted a limited decline of 0.3% in the third quarter as of July.
Excluding typically volatile sectors, such as other transportation and similar sectors, in order to monitor the underlying trend, the decline in industrial production was more limited on a monthly basis, however, the decline was higher on a quarterly basis.
Survey indicators for the manufacturing industry point that activity in the manufacturing industry remained relatively weak in the third quarter.
The manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate continued to decrease in the July-August period and dropped by 0.9 percentage points compared to the second quarter.
Meanwhile, the index of production in construction showed a moderate rise of 0.8% in quarterly terms in the second quarter, but rose by 19.6% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In July, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.6 million people, increasing by 0.2% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate decreased by 0.3 percentage points quarter-on-quarter, and the unemployment rate decreased by 0.4 percentage points to 8.0%.
Survey indicators suggest that the outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations has persisted in the third quarter of 2025 as well.
In June, the current account balance posted a monthly deficit of USD 2 billion.
The 12-month cumulative current account deficit increased by USD 2.8 billion month-on-month and stood at USD 18.9 billion.
With the impact of the holiday season, travel revenues reached USD 6 billion on a monthly basis, exceeding the previous years’ figures by USD 0.4 billion.
During this period, travel revenues stood at USD 58.1 billion in 12-month cumulative terms while the services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 62.1 billion.
In August, seasonally adjusted exports and imports decreased, and the 12-month cumulative foreign trade deficit narrowed compared to the previous month.
While factory holidays were influential in the weak course of exports in this period, the fall in exports and the monthly decline in energy prices were the primary drivers of the relatively stronger decrease in imports.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to shrink gradually in July and August.
Gold imports amounted to USD 1.1 billion in August and to USD 20.4 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods declined for two consecutive months in July and August, following the rise in the second quarter.
When provisional foreign trade data for August are considered along with the high-frequency leading data for September, the three-month average trends point to a limited fall in exports and a stronger one in imports.
Provisional data indicate a sustained decline in jewelry imports since June.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio hovered around 161% in June.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 141%.
In August, consumer prices were up by 2.04% while annual inflation fell by 0.57 percentage points to 32.95%.
The annual rates of change in the B and C indices dropped by 1.06 and 1.70 percentage points to 32.71% and 33.00%, respectively.
Contributions to annual inflation were up in the food and non-alcoholic beverages and alcohol-tobacco-gold groups, but down in energy, services and core goods groups.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the monthly increase in consumer prices slowed slightly compared to the previous month.
On the other hand, when seasonally adjusted, the slowdown in the rate of increase in consumer prices excluding food is evident.
The food group stood out with its price hike in August.
Drought and frost cases adversely affect agricultural production, exerting upward pressure on food prices both simultaneously and with a lag.
In this period, the monthly price increase in food gained strength, led by fruit prices in unprocessed food and by prices of bread and cereals in processed food.
It was notable that the rise in food prices spread across sub-items such as bread and cereals, milk and dairy products, non-alcoholic beverages, fresh fruits, pulses, red meat, and eggs.
In addition to food, cigarettes also stood out with their price increase.
The rise in prices of tobacco products continued as a portion of the increase in the specific SCT amount made in July was reflected by firms on prices in August.
Meanwhile, monthly energy inflation weakened significantly in August.
Monthly services inflation lost pace compared to the previous month while a mild course was observed in the group’s sub-items excluding transport services driven by passenger transport by air, and rents.
Core goods inflation remained favorable on the back of the weak course of durable consumption goods prices.
The underlying trend of inflation slowed down in August.
Based on three-month averages, indicators of the underlying trend remained flat.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the B index posted a similar monthly increase to that in July while the monthly increase in the C index declined.
In this period, across the groups of the B index, price increases slowed in services and core goods, but accelerated in processed food.
Both the distribution-based and model- based indicators decelerated compared to the previous month.
It is observed that median inflation, which exhibits relatively better forecast performance, receded to 1.8% on a monthly basis.
As of August, while the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months decreased in core goods (1.12%), it remained relatively flat in the services sector (2.96%) compared to the previous month.
In services excluding rents, this rate edged up to 2.61%.
In August, price increases in services lost momentum compared to the previous month.
Within the group, monthly price increases in rents and transportation services were remarkable while other subgroups exhibited milder figures.
Monthly rent inflation remained high due also to the seasonal increase in contract renewal rates.
Price hikes in transportation services were driven by seasonal developments stemming from passenger transport by air.
In fact, monthly inflation rates decelerated month-on-month across the services group in seasonally adjusted terms.
Leading indicators monitored via the micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that monthly rent inflation will rise somewhat due to the seasonally high contract renewal rates in September, but lose further momentum on an annual basis.
Highest contract renewal rates are seen in January and September across the year.
In these periods, even if the rate of rent increase in newly signed and renewed contracts declines compared to previous month, monthly rent increases may rise due to seasonal factors in contract renewal rates.
In fact, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI), and the decline continues.
Domestic producer prices rose significantly by 2.48% in August, and annual inflation increase by 0.97 points to 25.16%.
Across main industrial groups, there were notable price increases in the energy group (6.39%) in this period.
Meanwhile, capital goods, intermediate goods and durable consumption goods registered lower rates of increase ranging within the 1.1-1.3% band.
On a sectoral basis, tobacco products, electricity and natural gas, clothing and food manufacturing subgroups stood out with price increases.
In August, international commodity prices declined.
This development was driven by the fall in energy commodities.
Meanwhile, non-energy commodities recorded some increase.
The FAO Food Price Index registered an uptick due to oil prices in July, but followed a milder track in August.
Brent crude oil prices, which retreated to an average of USD 68.2 in August, dropped further in the first ten days of September.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained close to its historical average in July.
The global container index and the container index for China, both of which began to decline in July, dropped further in August and as of the first ten days of September.
The increase in the basket exchange rate was more limited in August.
The seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data pointed to a limited increase in input prices and a slowdown in goods prices.
According to the September results of the Survey of Market Participants, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 increased by 0.2 percentage points to 29.9%.
The inflation expectation for end-2026 increased by 0.4 percentage points to 20.8%.
Meanwhile, the 12-month- and 24- month-ahead inflation expectations were revised down by 0.6 percentage points and 0.1 percentage points to 22.3% and 16.8%, respectively.
The five-year ahead inflation expectation remained relatively flat and was measured at 11.2%.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectation of firms declined by 1.3 percentage points to 37.7% in August.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation of households decreased by 0.5 percentage points to 54.1%.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, and global developments continue to pose risks to the disinflation process.
Food prices and service items with high inertia are exerting upward pressure on inflation.
According to leading indicators, the services and food prices developments stood out on inflation in September.
Indicators imply that the underlying trend may slightly rise in this period.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, monthly services inflation is anticipated to increase as the school season is back.
The resumption of schools in this month has effects that spread across services subitems.
Education and transport services saw price increases due to private university tuition fees and school bus fares, respectively while the rise in student residence fees drove accommodation prices up in the restaurants-hotels group.
Increases in daycare fees are reflected in other services subitem.
As pricing in these services items usually takes place once a year, price increases in the relevant subitems may come out higher in this period.
Moreover, increases in private university tuition fees, which were reflected in the previous year's price index in August and September due to the registration period, will only be reflected in September this year.
According to leading indicators, food prices are relatively negative due in part to supply-side factors stemming from drought.
Unprocessed food prices are on the rise in response to developments in products such as vegetables, white meat and eggs while processed food prices have been increasing, led by items such as oils and dairy products.
On the other hand, the increase in non-food consumer items is on a more moderate course.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 43% to 40.5%.
The Committee has also lowered the Central Bank overnight lending rate from 46% to 43.5% and the overnight borrowing rate from 41.5% to 39%.
The tight monetary policy stance, which will be maintained until price stability is achieved, will strengthen the disinflation process through demand, exchange rate, and expectation channels.
The macroeconomic framework outlined in the Medium-Term Program will contribute to this process.
The Committee will determine the policy rate by taking into account realized and expected inflation and its underlying trend in a way to ensure the tightness required by the projected disinflation path in line with the interim targets.
Monetary policy stance will be tightened in case of a significant deviation in inflation outlook from the interim targets.
Committee Meeting October 31, 2025, No.
Despite ongoing uncertainty, the moderate improvement in the global growth forecasts for 2025 has continued.
On the other hand, rising protectionism, the fading of temporary effects of front-loading, and the possibility of prolonged uncertainty amplify the downside risks to the global growth outlook.
Accordingly, the weak and fragile outlook is expected to continue; the global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is projected to increase by 1.9% in 2025 and 2.3% in 2026.
While the weak course in the global demand outlook and the supply-side developments continue to weigh on crude oil prices, energy commodity prices have declined during the current MPC period.
On the other hand, non-energy commodity prices continued their uptrend led by industrial and precious metal prices.
Recently, while fluctuations in risk appetite have led to portfolio outflows from emerging markets, global uncertainties and geopolitical developments keep downside risks to portfolio flows alive.
Turkish lira (TRY) deposit rates dropped by 82 basis points compared to the week ending September 12 and stood at 48.5% as of the week ending October 17.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) decreased by 236 basis points to 47.9%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) declined by 211 basis points to 62.7%, housing loan rates fell by 124 basis points to 37.9%, and vehicle loan rates dropped by 570 basis points to 36.3%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans declined to 3.1% in the September 12 – October 17 period.
This decline resulted from the slowdown in credit card growth.
The average four-week growth rate of TRY commercial loans increased from 2.3% to 2.6%.
The average four- week growth rate of foreign currency (FX) commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates stood at 0.5%, below the previous MPC period level.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 20.6 billion since September 12 and reached USD 198.4 billion as of October 17.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium has remained flat since September 10, standing at 267 basis points as of October 22.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira stood at 10.5% and 19.8%, respectively, as of October 22.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, the change in non-resident investors' positions has remained limited in the stock market while net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.3 billion, nearly all of which was directed towards the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market.
In August, the retail sales volume index recorded a monthly increase of 0.9% and a quarterly increase of 1.8%.
Excluding gold, the rates of increase in the index was lower both on a monthly and a quarterly basis.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index declined by 1.4% month-on-month and by 3.6% quarter-on-quarter, mainly due to the decrease in wholesale trade.
The services production index increased by 0.4% in August.
On a quarterly basis, the flat trend observed in the second quarter continued in the third quarter as well.
Card spending increased in the August-September period.
White goods sales decreased in the July-August period while automobile sales dropped in September after the rapid monthly rise in August, leading to a more moderate rise in the third quarter.
In sum, recent data suggest that demand conditions are at disinflationary levels.
In August, the industrial production index increased by 0.4% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and by 7.1% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production remained flat in the third quarter as of August.
Excluding typically volatile sectors, such as other transportation and similar sectors, in order to monitor the underlying trend, industrial production posted a limited decline on a quarterly basis.
Leading data imply that the manufacturing industry capacity utilization rate, which continued to decrease in the third quarter, will remain flat in October.
As of August, the index of production in construction increased by 5.1% in quarterly terms in the third quarter, and rose by 24.5% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In August, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.8 million people, increasing by 0.5% on a quarterly basis.
In this period, the labor force participation rate increased by 0.1 percentage points quarter-on-quarter, and the unemployment rate decreased by 0.2 percentage points to 8.3%.
Survey indicators suggest that the outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations persisted in the third quarter of 2025 as well.
In August, the current account balance posted a monthly surplus of USD 5.5 billion.
The 12- month cumulative current account deficit decreased by USD 0.6 billion month-on-month and stood at USD 18.3 billion.
With the impact of the holiday season, travel revenues reached USD 8.3 billion on a monthly basis, exceeding the previous years’ figures by USD 0.15 billion.
During this period, travel revenues stood at USD 58.1 billion in 12-month cumulative terms while the services balance surplus remained robust and reached USD 62.3 billion.
In September, seasonally adjusted exports decreased while imports rose, and the 12-month cumulative foreign trade deficit increased compared to the previous month.
In this period, gold imports, which were boosted by the global increase in gold prices, also contributed to this increase.
In fact, when gold is excluded, the widening in the foreign trade deficit was more limited.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to expand in September.
Gold imports amounted to USD 2.5 billion in September and to USD 21.7 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods increased slightly in September, following the decline in July and August.
When provisional foreign trade data for September are considered along with the high-frequency leading data for October, the three-month average trends point to a fall in exports, and a recovery in imports after the decrease in the third quarter.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio stood at 167.3% in August.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 150%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remain at high levels; nevertheless, debt rollover ratios may decline in the upcoming period as FX- denominated borrowing declines and economic activity slows down.
Consumer prices were up by 3.23% in September while annual inflation increased by 0.34 percentage points to 33.29%.
The annual rate of change in the B index edged up by 0.15 percentage points to 32.86%, whereas that of the C index dropped by 0.46 percentage points to 32.54%.
Contributions to annual inflation decreased in the alcohol-tobacco-gold and services groups by 0.18 and 0.13 percentage points, respectively; remained unchanged in the core goods group, but increased in the food and non-alcoholic beverages and energy groups by 0.63 and 0.02 percentage points, respectively.
Accordingly, the rise in annual consumer inflation was driven by food prices.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the monthly increase in consumer prices accelerated compared to the previous month while non-food inflation remained relatively flat.
In September, the food and non-alcoholic beverages group stood out with its price hike of 4.62%.
Supply-side factors, particularly the drought with its evident impact recently, remained the main driver of food inflation in this period, as well.
Additionally, increases in purchase prices of certain agricultural products also had their impact on inflation realizations.
In this period, unprocessed food prices surged by 5.53% on a monthly basis, particularly led by vegetables, nuts (hazelnut, pistachio), white meat, and eggs.
The monthly price increase in processed food remained high at 3.90%; price increases spread across the subgroup where fats and oils, milk and dairy products, and beverages like coffee and tea stood out.
The rise in raw milk purchase prices affected milk and dairy product prices in this period.
The price increase in the services sector strengthened in September compared to the previous month, due to the back-to-school effect on many items.
In this period, the monthly rise in prices of core goods was driven by the clothing and footwear subgroup that was affected by the launch of the new season as well as by durable consumption goods.
Meanwhile, monthly energy inflation posted a relatively moderate increase in September.
The underlying trend of inflation increased in September.
Indicators of the underlying trend also increased slightly based on three-month averages.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases strengthened in the B and C indices compared to the previous month.
Across the groups comprising the B index, price increases rose in core goods, hovered at high levels in processed food, and remained flat in services.
Similarly, the distribution-based and model-based indicators also increased compared to the previous month.
Median inflation, which performs better in forecasting, rose to 2.1% on a monthly basis.
As of September, while the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months increased slightly in core goods (1.21%), it remained almost flat in the services sector (2.95%) compared to the previous month.
In services excluding rents, this rate remained flat at 2.71%.
In September, price increases in services strengthened compared to the previous month due to the back-to-school effect.
Within the group, monthly price increases in education and transport services stood out.
While the rise in university tuition fees was felt in education services, prices in transport services rose due to school bus fares.
The rise in student residence fees drove accommodation prices higher while the increase in daycare fees pushed the other services subitem up.
As these services items are priced once a year, price increases in the mentioned subitems may come out higher in these months.
Thus, in September, the back-to-school effect on monthly consumer inflation was approximately 0.7 percentage points.
On the other hand, in this period, monthly rent inflation has slowed over the previous month, despite high contract renewal rates.
Leading indicators monitored via the micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that monthly rent inflation will decelerate due also to the seasonal decline in contract renewal rates in October.
On an annual basis, rent inflation remains on the decline.
Rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI), and the decline continues.
However, rent inflation remains higher than projected due to supply-side factors specific to the housing sector such as earthquakes and urban transformation.
Domestic producer prices increased by 2.52% in September and maintained its upward trend.
Annual inflation was up 1.43 percentage points to 26.59%.
Items that recorded remarkable price increases in this period were food products (6.77%) and durable consumption goods (2.80%).
Price increases in the manufacture of food products have strengthened over the last two months.
This was mainly driven by processed meat and meat products, led by poultry meat, processed fruits-vegetables, as well as fats and oils.
International commodity prices rose somewhat in September.
This development was driven by the increase in non-energy commodity prices, led by precious and industrial metals.
Energy commodity prices remained moderate during this period.
The FAO Food Price Index dropped in September due to the prices of sugar and dairy products.
Brent crude oil prices, averaging around USD 68.0 in September, retreated to an average of USD 64.5 in the first three weeks of October.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained close to its historical average in September.
The global container index and the container index for China, both of which began to decline in July, dropped further in September and as of the first three weeks of October.
Domestic crop production forecasts for 2025 were revised down in cereals and fruits, highlighting the increasingly negative trend in the supply of agricultural and food products.
The basket exchange rate edged up in September, being more noticeable in the euro rate.
During this period, seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data recorded increases for both input and goods prices.
The risks posed by recent price developments, particularly in food, to the disinflation process through inflation expectations and pricing behavior have become more pronounced.
Inflation expectations picked up in October.
According to the October results of the Survey of Market Participants, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 rose by 1.9 percentage points to 31.8%.
The year-end inflation expectation for 2026 increased by 1.4 percentage points to 22.1%.
Expectations for other terms also went up.
Meanwhile, the 12-month and 24-month- ahead inflation expectations were revised up by 1.0 percentage point and 0.6 percentage points to 23.3% and 17.4%, respectively.
The five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.4%, with an upward revision of 0.3 percentage points.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectation of firms declined by 0.9 percentage points to 36.8% in September.
In the same period, the 12-month- ahead inflation expectation of households decreased by 1.1 percentage points to 53.0%.
Data point to a slowdown in the disinflation process.
Leading indicators suggest that the unfavorable trend in food prices continues, albeit at a slower pace.
Unprocessed food prices are on the rise due to developments in products such as vegetables, white meat, eggs, rice, pulses, and nuts, and processed food prices are up, led by items such as fats and oils, meat products, bread and cereals, tea, and dairy products (affected by the raw milk purchase price).
In the core goods group, clothing prices increase due to seasonal effects associated with the launch of a new season while durable consumption goods prices rise at a more limited rate compared to the previous month.
Prices for white goods and automobiles, which rose significantly in the previous month, record a relatively limited increase in October.
Meanwhile, price increases in furniture and certain consumer electronics items are more pronounced in October.
Energy prices follow a mild course on the back of global developments.
According to leading indicators, monthly services inflation slows significantly during this period while remaining relatively flat when adjusted for seasonal effects.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 40.5% to 39.5%.
The Committee has also lowered the Central Bank overnight lending rate from 43.5% to 42.5% and the overnight borrowing rate from 39% to 38%.
The step size is reviewed prudently on a meeting-by-meeting basis with a focus on the inflation outlook.
Committee Meeting December 18, 2025, No.
Uncertainty regarding global trade policies has receded, but it remains above its historical average.
Despite ongoing uncertainty, the moderate improvement trend in global growth forecasts has extended into the current MPC period.
On the other hand, rising protectionism, the fading of temporary effects of front-loading, and the possibility of prolonged uncertainty keep downside risks to the global growth outlook alive.
Accordingly, the weak and fragile outlook is expected to continue; the global growth index, which is weighted by the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, is projected to increase by 2.0% in 2025 and 2.3% in 2026.
While the weak course in the global demand outlook and the supply-side developments continue to weigh on crude oil prices, energy commodity prices remain low.
On the other hand, non-energy commodity prices continued their uptrend led by agricultural commodity, industrial and precious metal prices.
Turkish lira (TRY) deposit rates dropped by 119 basis points compared to the week ending October 24 and stood at 46.9% as of the week ending December 5.
In the same period, TRY commercial loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts and credit cards) increased by 76 basis points to 47.9%.
General-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) rose by 262 basis points to 64.6%, housing loan rates fell by 25 basis points to 37.8%, and vehicle loan rates dropped by 125 basis points to 34.1%.
The average four-week growth rate of retail loans edged down to 3% in the October 24 – December 5 period.
The average four-week growth rate of TRY commercial loans remained flat at 2.6%.
The average four-week growth rate of foreign currency (FX) commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates stood at 0.4%, below the previous MPC period level.
The CBRT has decided to take simplification steps regarding the reserve requirement (RR) regulation.
The Bank has terminated the provisional arrangement setting the reserve requirement ratio at zero percent for the amount of increase in FX liabilities with maturities longer than one year that banks and financing companies obtain directly from abroad as of year-end.
Additionally, revisions have been made to the FX reserve requirements, which will be maintained at the new ratios as of January 16, 2026.
The gross international reserves of the CBRT increased by USD 0.9 billion since October 24 and reached USD 186.4 billion as of December 5.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium declined by around 41 basis points since October 22, standing at 226 basis points as of December 10.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira decreased to 8.4% and 18.7%, respectively, as of December 10.
Since the previous MPC meeting week, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 1.8 billion, comprising USD 1.6 billion of inflows to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 0.2 billion of inflows to the stock market.
In the third quarter of 2025, gross domestic product (GDP) increased by 3.7% year-on-year and 1.1% quarter-on-quarter.
Quarterly GDP growth turned out higher than projected.
Due to the decline in crop production caused by frost and drought, agricultural value added fell by 12.7% on an annual basis in this period, limiting growth.
Growth was higher when the agricultural sector was excluded.
By the expenditure approach, private consumption and total investments made a positive contribution to annual growth in this period.
Private consumption, which declined in the first two quarters of the year, increased in the third quarter on a quarterly basis.
Meanwhile, total investments continued to support growth in this period, just as they did in the second quarter of the year.
In the third quarter, imports of goods and services decreased on a quarterly basis while exports increased.
Thus, net exports contributed positively to quarterly growth.
Economic activity, which picked up in the second quarter, eased somewhat in the third quarter, growing at a rate close to its quarterly potential.
The services production index edged down in September.
In October, the retail sales volume index recorded a monthly increase of 0.2% and a quarterly increase of 2.2%.
Retail sales excluding gold declined by 0.1% month-on-month while quarterly growth decelerated and stood at 0.7%.
In the same period, the trade sales volume index decreased by 3.6% on a monthly basis and continued to decline on a quarterly basis, similar to the previous quarter.
Card spending increased in the October-November period.
White goods sales increased in October and automobile sales rose moderately in the October-November period.
Survey data for manufacturing firms indicate that registered domestic market orders increased slightly in the last quarter of the year, after declining in the previous two quarters.
In sum, leading indicators for the last quarter point out that demand conditions continue to support the disinflation process.
In October, the industrial production index decreased by 0.8% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and by 2.2% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
On a quarterly basis, industrial production declined by 2% in the fourth quarter as of October.
Excluding typically volatile sectors, such as other transportation and similar sectors, in order to monitor the underlying trend, industrial production posted a more limited decline on a quarterly basis.
Survey indicators for the manufacturing industry point to an increase in the sector’s activity in the fourth quarter.
The capacity utilization rate increased moderately by 0.2 quarter-on-quarter as of November.
The index of production in construction increased by 7.8% in quarterly terms in the third quarter, and rose by 26.3% compared to the same period of the previous year.
In October, seasonally adjusted employment stood at 32.8 million people, increasing by 0.4% relative to the previous quarter average.
In this period, the labor force participation rate increased by 0.2 percentage points quarter-on-quarter, and the unemployment rate edged up by 0.1 percentage points to 8.5%.
Survey indicators suggest that the outlook lagging behind historical averages for manufacturing firms' future employment expectations persisted in the fourth quarter of 2025 as well.
In September, the current account balance ran a monthly surplus of USD 1.1 billion.
The 12- month cumulative current account deficit increased by USD 1.7 billion month-on-month and stood at USD 20.1 billion.
Travel revenues came out USD 7 billion, reaching USD 58.9 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
The services balance surplus remained robust at USD 62.6 billion.
In November, seasonally adjusted exports and imports increased.
This increase was more pronounced in exports, which had declined over the past three months.
However, the 12- month cumulative foreign trade deficit increased compared to the previous month.
In fact, when gold is excluded, the foreign trade deficit narrowed.
According to the current data, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to expand in October and November.
Gold imports remained high in October and November, increasing further in 12-month cumulative terms.
Seasonally adjusted imports of consumption goods decreased further in October, following the significant decline in the third quarter, but increased in November.
When provisional foreign trade data for November are considered along with the high-frequency leading data for December, the three-month average trends point to an increase in exports and imports.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s 12-month cumulative long-term debt rollover ratio stood at 169.5% in September.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 147.1%.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities remain at high levels.
Consumer prices were up by 0.87% in November while annual inflation dropped by 1.80 percentage points to 31.07%.
The fall in annual consumer inflation was driven by food prices while annual consumer inflation excluding food remained relatively flat.
The annual rate of change in the B index was down by 0.35 percentage points to 32.17%, whereas that of the C index dropped by 0.40 percentage points to 31.65%.
Contributions to annual inflation decreased in the food and non-alcoholic beverages, core goods and services groups by 1.61, 0.20 and 0.17 percentage points, respectively; but increased in the alcohol-tobacco-gold and energy groups by 0.10 and 0.08 percentage points, respectively.
In seasonally adjusted terms, consumer prices saw weaker monthly increases compared to the previous month.
In November, consumer inflation was lower than expected due to a downward surprise in food prices.
Having followed an unfavorable course over the recent months, food prices fell in November due to unprocessed food prices, which was led by vegetable products while the monthly price increase in the processed food group decelerated.
In this period, the decline of 3.33% in unprocessed food prices was driven by falling prices in vegetables (-9.52%), eggs (- 8.38%) and white meat (-8.24%).
On the processed food front, prices rose by 1.50% compared to the previous month due mainly to meat products (5.17%) and fats and oils (4.22%).
Prices of services rose by 1.46% in November, and services inflation remained flat in seasonally adjusted terms.
The monthly increase in core goods prices was relatively moderate in November.
Meanwhile, monthly energy inflation posted an uptick due mainly to the fuel item driven by diesel oil, which diverged from the developments in crude oil prices.
Following an increase in September, the underlying trend of inflation declined slightly in October and November.
Indicators of the underlying trend did not register an apparent change based on three-month averages.
Seasonally adjusted monthly inflation remained flat in the B index and increased in the C index compared to the previous month.
Across the groups comprising the B index, price increases slowed in processed food, remained flat in services and posted a slight increase in core goods.
The distribution-based and model-based indicators decreased compared to the previous month.
Median inflation, which performs better in forecasting, fell to 1.8% on a monthly basis.
As of November, while the seasonally adjusted average price increase over the last three months increased slightly in core goods (1.19%) it remained almost flat in the services sector (2.89%) compared to the previous month.
In November, while annual inflation declined in rents and communication services it went up in other groups.
Rent inflation weakened further at 2.49% on a monthly basis, driving the group’s annual inflation down to 63.59%.
Prices in the transport subgroup increased by 1.69% and annual inflation rose to 43.24%.
This was mainly driven by the increase in prices of passenger transport by air.
The monthly price increase in the communication subgroup (1.51%) was driven by rises in phone call and internet charges.
In restaurants-hotels, monthly inflation receded to 0.89% due to declining hotel prices.
Prices in the other services subgroup remained relatively moderate at 1.06%, with package tour prices rising in line with those of pilgrimage tour services.
Leading indicators monitored via the micro data of the Retail Payment System (RPS) suggest that the contract renewal rate continued to decrease and the rates of rent increases used as a reference in contracts decelerated in December.
Thus, rent inflation remains on the decline both in monthly and annual terms.
Domestic producer prices rose by 0.84% in November, and annual inflation was up by 0.23 points to 27.23%.
Monthly producer inflation weakened compared to previous months due in part to the Turkish lira outlook.
In this period, energy prices declined (-0.48%) while capital goods (1.54%) and intermediate goods (1.27%) stood out with price increases.
International commodity prices went up slightly in November, primarily driven by the rise in energy and agricultural commodity prices.
Gold prices posted a more moderate increase during this period.
The FAO Food Price Index dropped in November, led by prices of sugar, dairy products, and oils.
Brent crude oil prices, averaging around USD 64.7 in October, reached an average of USD 63.8 in the first ten days of December.
Throughout the year, commodity prices declined in energy but rose in other items, yet remaining supportive of disinflation in overall terms.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was slightly below its historical average in November.
The global container index and the container index for China, both of which began to decline in July, took an upturn in November but this proved to be temporary as of the first ten days of December.
The basket exchange rate increased at a lower rate in November.
During this period, seasonally adjusted manufacturing industry PMI data pointed to a fall in both input and goods prices.
Inflation expectations of firms and households improved in November, whereas market participants’ expectations diverged.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants, the year-end inflation expectation for 2025 was up by 0.4 percentage points to 32.2%.
The year-end inflation expectation for 2026 rose by 1.1 percentage points to 23.2%, while expectations for other terms also went up.
The 12-month and 24-month-ahead inflation expectations were revised up by 0.2 and 0.3 percentage points to 23.5% and 17.7%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was measured at 11.3%, with a decline of 0.1 percentage points.
As for the expectations of the real sector, the 12- month-ahead annual inflation expectation of firms dropped by 0.6 percentage points to 35.7% in November.
In the same period, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation of households also decreased by 2.2 percentage points to 52.2%.
While showing signs of improvement, inflation expectations and pricing behavior continue to pose risks to the disinflation process.
Leading indicators signal that the favorable course in food prices continued from November into December.
On the unprocessed food front, prices of fresh fruits and vegetables have decreased while the rise in red meat prices partly limits this favorable course.
The gradual slowdown in monthly processed food inflation continues.
Energy prices are relatively stable due to the correction in fuel prices.
Leading indicators suggest milder price increases in the core goods and services groups in December compared to previous month.
Underlying inflation indicators are also expected to maintain their downward trend in December.
Against this backdrop, leading indicators imply that inflation will remain lower than projected in this month.
Committee (the Committee) has decided to reduce the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 39.5% to 38%.
The Committee has also lowered the Central Bank overnight lending rate from 42.5% to 41% and the overnight borrowing rate from 38% to 36.5%.