Against this background, the Committee assesses that rising global uncertainty and the adverse developments in food and energy prices may lead to some delay in reaching the inflation target.
Although recently released data point to a stronger economic activity than anticipated, recession concerns in developed economies as a result of geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes continue, and conditions threatening financial stability have emerged.
Although the first-quarter rise in construction employment suggests a rebound over the previous year, tightening credit conditions and ongoing uncertainties are expected to put more pressure on the housing market.
Another major risk to the inflation outlook is a sharper than expected slowdown in the global economic activity, which, in turn, could lead to further volatility in financial markets.
As a result, it is assessed that the uncertainty effect of an interest rate hike on financial markets might be more limited than that of the exit from the quantitative easing program.
As advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
Central banks of both advanced and emerging economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
Considering the increasing risks regarding global demand, the Committee evaluated that the current policy rate is adequate and decided to end the rate cut cycle that started in August.
Considering the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that the level of the policy rate was supportive of disinflation.
Despite the steps taken for the resolution of problems regarding the Euro Area, risk appetite remains highly sensitive to any new developments due to ongoing fragilities in the financial system, elevated levels of sovereign borrowing costs across peripheral economies, and weakening growth outlook.
Developments in domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy support disinflation.
Domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy continue to support disinflation.
Even though central banks announce in their statements that inflation is likely to increase temporarily in the post-pandemic normalization process, the forward guidance delivered and market expectations point that the low interest environment would continue for an extended period in advanced economies.
However, a faster than envisaged slowdown in the world economy or disorderly developments owing to global imbalances still remain as possible scenarios that may lead to another wave of portfolio shock in emerging markets.
However, global financial risks and the uncertainty over global economic policies are rather elevated for the coming months, upholding the downside risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
However, reverberations of recent market volatility through confidence channel, the potential impact of recent global and geopolitical developments on financial conditions and the lack of any signs of improvement in tourism outlook limit the pace of economic recovery.
However, rising interest rates, the perception of uncertainty resulting from ongoing fluctuations and the relative price increase in imported goods will unfavorably affect domestic demand in the following period.
However, the course of capital flows in line with uncertainties regarding global economic policies, geopolitical developments, the subsided course of the labor market and the lingering volatility in exchange rates may stand out as factors to limit the pace of growth in 2017.
However, the downside 2 risks to the magnitude and duration of the slowdown in economic activity are kept alive by the high level of financial volatility and perceptions of uncertainty.
In conclusion, although the readings related to the first couple of months of 2008 indicate an ongoing but moderating growth, deepening problems in international credit markets have increased the downside risks.
In fact, June’s seasonally adjusted data suggest a notable improvement in the underlying core goods inflation.
In light of these assessments, and considering the normalization in the money and credit markets, the Committee has decided to gradually remove the liquidity measures implemented during the crisis.
In light of these assessments, the Committee concluded that the probability attached to the early recovery scenario in the January Inflation Report has diminished considerably.
In particular, this means any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would occur largely through expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes.
In such a case, the CBRT will formulate the monetary policy response assessing the disinflationary impact of weaker demand conditions in tandem with the second-round effects of cost pressures on inflation.
In sum, inflation is expected to fall further in the upcoming period; yet core inflation indicators are foreseen to remain above the target for a while.
In sum, the Committee expects that inflation will continue to fall in the upcoming period but core inflation indicators will remain above the target for a while.
In that case, goods group inflation will have to be realized below 3 percent, for the 2006 target not to be exceeded.
In this context, employment prospects are unlikely to improve soon given the low rates of capacity utilization and the decline in investment sentiment.
In this respect, the Committee members indicated that the likelihood of an early recovery in the global economy, envisaged as an alternative scenario in the January Inflation Report, had almost diminished.
In this scenario a more protracted and slow recovery would lead to another wave of portfolio shock for emerging markets, weak external demand, tighter credit conditions, and further drops in commodity prices.
It is also likely that problems in the Euro Area may further intensify, given the ongoing deleveraging process in banking, household and public sector balance sheets and possible delays in the institutional mechanisms to resolve the related problems.
It was reminded that the auction amount could continue to be reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist.
Leading indicators for October point out that food inflation is yet to increase.
Lingering volatility in global financial markets and the weak course of confidence indices are the risk factors that may limit the contribution of the private sector final demand to growth.
Meanwhile, interviews with firms point to a loss of momentum at the sectoral level due to the effect of high rates of price increases on the purchasing power.
Meanwhile, the weak course of confidence indices coupled with domestic and external uncertainties are the risk factors that may restrict the contribution of the final private demand to growth.
Moreover, deleveraging in the euro area banking system feeds into financial fragilities, increasing the probability of a renewed deterioration in the risk appetite.
Moreover, moderate pace of consumer credit growth suggests that financial conditions are tight as well.
Moreover, observing the favorable developments in credit conditions, the Committee has indicated that it would be appropriate to proceed with the remaining measures outlined in the exit strategy.
On the other hand, the decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is being observed.
Overall, the tightness in financial conditions continues to some extent, and uncertainties regarding the impact of the problems in financial markets on the real economy persist, suggesting that downside risks still remain.
Price increases in imported goods, rise in interest rates, and increased volatility in financial markets would decelerate both consumption and investment demand in the short run.
Put differently, the recent sharp declines in the core inflation measures have been primarily driven by the tax cuts, and therefore the rapid slowdown in these measures is expected to be temporary.
Regarding the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that the current level of the policy rate was supportive of disinflation.
The cautious pace of interest rate cuts to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
The cautious pace of interest rate cuts to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are seen as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity.
The Central Bank will continue to take the necessary measures to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the domestic economy.
The Committee assessed that rising global uncertainty and the adverse developments in food and energy prices might lead to some delay in reaching the inflation target.
The Committee evaluated taking a similar step in the following meeting and ending the rate cut cycle.
The Committee indicated that concerns regarding sovereign debt problems in some European economies and the global growth outlook have continued to intensify, increasing the risks highlighted in the July Committee meeting.
The Committee indicated that the recovery in credit would be slow, reflecting tight financial conditions both in domestic and external terms.
The Committee members highlighted the relative weakness in capital flows to emerging markets due to heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in some euroarea countries, and stated that it might be useful to revise the amount purchased via daily auctions.
The current outlook in loans not only contains medium-term inflation pressures but also supports the improvement in the current account balance.
The decelerating impact of the monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand has begun to be observed.
The decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on inflation are envisaged to wane gradually.
The decline in inflation expectations has continued to tighten the monetary conditions in the last quarter of 2006.
The downside risks to future crude oil prices have intensified.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of Open Market Operations funding, to reduce the weight of swaps in the composition of funding, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
The perception that leading central banks will keep interest rates at low levels for a prolonged period encourages the search for yield.
The recent favorable outlook notwithstanding, downside risks to global economy still reside.
The underlying trend of monthly inflation registered a limited decline in April.
The unfavorable outlook continues for spending categories more sensitive to current income.
Therefore saving the extra tax revenues driven by the stronger-than expected economic activity would not only reduce financial stability risks, but also increase the efficiency of the new policy mix.
Therefore, establishing a coordination between the financial sector policies that restrict the balance sheet effects of the corporate sector and the monetary policy that focuses on inflation has become crucial for preventing the financial conditions from falling into an unproductive tightening cycle.
Therefore, strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also critical for facilitating expectations management and for enhancing the simulative impact of the monetary accommodation.
This, in turn, may pose a downside risk to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Thus, the outlook for energy costs, which had been supporting the inflation outlook for a long time, reversed in this month.
To support the monetary transmission mechanism, the CBRT has taken policy measures to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-Protected Deposit Accounts.
Unprocessed food prices pose downside risks for the inflation outlook in 2012.
With rising interest rates and shortening maturities, the rate of increase in credits has already declined.
Yet, the falling number of foreign visitors weighs on revenues from services, posing a downside risk to the current account balance.
Yet, the recent Turkish lira plunge and volatile exchange rates might weigh on private demand in the upcoming period, curbing already weak investments in particular.