Although recent developments regarding imported input costs have eased the upside risks to the inflation outlook, the improvement in core inflation is still limited.
Having a high tendency for backward indexation and being affected by wage developments, the effect of private school fees on consumer inflation may lose strength gradually in the summer depending on the announcement dates.
The month-on-month increase in inflation expectations is slowing down.
Should the goals set out in the MTP be implemented, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digits throughout the forecast horizon.
The total effect of adjustments in certain products with administered prices in early January amounted to 0.7 points, as projected.
However, in February, with these effects largely dissipated and the new SUT regulation in place, the monthly services inflation rate fell significantly to 3.61%.
It was indicated that, given the recently heightened uncertainties, designing a flexible mechanism would be more appropriate.
July’s domestic tensions dampened final domestic demand through both consumer and investment spending in the third quarter.
In order to alleviate the tightening in liquidity conditions since May, the CBT has been injecting Turkish lira liquidity into the markets via repo operations.
In the short term, the base effect from unprocessed food prices and developments in the TL-denominated import prices are expected to drive inflation upwards significantly.
In October, industrial production increased by 2.4%, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, on a monthly basis and it increased by 3.1% on an annual basis.
In December, the 12-month-ahead annual inflation expectations of households fell by 0.9 percentage points to 63.1%.
In sum, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
Nonetheless, weak domestic demand conditions would limit the pass-through stemming from upside cost-push shocks.
While forming the inflation outlook, the Committee projected that, in line with budget targets for 2007, there would be a significant decline in the contribution of public expenditures to growth in the second half of the year, and that would restrain the growth in total domestic demand.
Domestic demand continues to expand.
In the recent period, end-2007 inflation expectations displayed a slight increase possibly owing to the high inflation outturns in the first quarter.
The Committee emphasized the essence of a liquid foreign exchange market for a healthy financial system, and stated that supporting the liquidity positions of the banks should be the priority under current conditions.
Emerging markets continue to see massive capital outflows.
The labor market outlook continued to deteriorate in August due to sluggish economic activity.
Meanwhile, the recovery in domestic demand stimulates imports and the contribution of net exports to economic growth declines.
Against this background, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators recorded a sharp increase.
Leading indicators suggest that annual food inflation continued to fall in the first half of April.
July data indicate that production and imports of consumer goods have been more robust than the second-quarter average.
These developments are expected to have a limited effect on end-2014 inflation due to the weak outlook of the global economy and the mild course of domestic demand.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages group increased by 7.71% in July, and annual inflation rose by 6.80 points to 60.72%.
Energy price inflation climbed up to an annual rate of 27.38 percent.
The services inflation, which is currently around 12 percent, is anticipated to decrease further in a certain extent next year in line with the slowdown expected in domestic demand.
The 24-month ahead inflation expectation and the five-year ahead inflation expectation were measured as 17.74% and 8.22%, respectively.
In fact, the relative volatility of the Turkish lira has decreased notably since September compared to other emerging market currencies.
Recent data indicate that economic activity has continued to slow down.
Recent indicators point to a further slowdown in consumer demand in the second quarter.
Prices of durable goods edged down by 0.30 percent in December, and the downtrend in the group’s annual inflation continued.
Monetary policy remains restrictive even after the recent rate cuts.
Last month’s Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting mentioned the possibility of more limited price declines of unprocessed food this summer due to early harvest of some vegetable items.
The favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
According to export data released by the Turkish Exporters’ Assembly for March and April and “expectations for export orders for the next three months” from CBT’s Business Tendency Survey, exports will continue to grow sharply in the second quarter of 2008.
To this end, the Committee has decided to widen the gap between lending and borrowing rates by reducing the borrowing rates by 400 basis points.
Seasonal discounts led to a higher rate of decline in clothing prices compared to previous years.
Besides, the Consumer Confidence Index also registered a decline.
Adjustment in the minimum wage in July 2023, accompanied by wage adjustments for civil servants and public sector workers, and wage hikes becoming broad-based had important impacts on inflation in the third quarter of the year, especially through the cost channel.
Accordingly, upcoming data related to inflation outlook will be monitored carefully.
All these developments alleviate the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
On the other hand, switching to a cost-based automatic pricing mechanism in electricity would reduce the risks on shortage of supply as well as on price stability.
In short, cost push pressures and the volatility in food prices in recent months have led to a sharp increase in inflation.
According to main industrial groupings, energy, non-durable and durable consumption goods groups stood out with sharp monthly price increases.
The steep increase in vegetable prices due to adverse weather conditions and the ongoing surge in meat prices pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by about 10 percentage points in February.
In addition, non-residents continue to raise their holdings in Turkey.
Against this background, in the last quarter of the year, it is expected that the contribution of net exports to economic growth will decline, and the current account balance, which has recently recorded significant improvement, will maintain a moderate course with the contribution of supportive policy measures.
Overall financial conditions is buoyed by macroprudential arrangements and reduced tightness in monetary conditions thanks to the CBRT’s policy actions.
Yet, the Committee assessed that readings on inflation do not present an unfavorable outlook when food-related items and administered prices are excluded.
The Committee stated that the cautious monetary policy stance, the announced macroprudential measures, and weak capital flows will bring down the loan growth rates to more reasonable levels.
While accumulated cost pressures keep the upside risks to processed food prices alive, they may also exert an additional pressure on catering services prices through periodic factors.
The provisional foreign trade data for November suggest that seasonally-adjusted exports and imports increased on a monthly basis, partially offsetting the deceleration in the previous month.
Producer prices for durable goods fell for the third consecutive month, partly due to changes in import prices, while aggregate demand conditions continued to soften.
The considerable fall in volatility in global financial markets and the increased the risk appetite reinforces the support of global financial conditions on economic activity.
Industrial production grew by 1.7 percent in September on a seasonally adjusted basis.
In light of these developments, the Committee has assessed that meeting the medium-term inflation targets requires the maintenance of a cautious policy stance and decided to keep the policy rates on hold.
Domestic demand became the main driver of growth, while net exports had a considerably high negative contribution to growth.
Monthly rent inflation is expected to decelerate in the last quarter of the year as contract renewal rates will fall compared to the third quarter, and the rate of rent increases in new and renewed contracts will continue to decline.
The volatility in global financial markets has recently eased, and portfolio inflows to emerging markets gained momentum amid the increased risk appetite.
On the other hand, rates of rent increases in new and renewed contracts obtained from RPS micro data, and those monitored through residential property valuation reports are below the current annual inflation in the rent item of the consumer price index (CPI).
The Committee concluded that inflation, which has drifted away from the target, calls for the effective use of the monetary policy.
Nevertheless, the increase in financial volatility and expected slowdown in aggregate demand are closely monitored for their impact on firms’ cash flows and balance sheets.
While goods inflation is declining, improvement in services inflation is expected to lag.
The weakening effects of geopolitical risks on global economic activity continue to increase.
Supported by the significant fall in energy prices, the rise in producer prices remained limited and the decline in annual producer inflation was sustained in March.
Taking into account the lagged impact of monetary tightening, the Committee assesses that the monetary tightness required to establish the disinflation course is achieved and that this level will be maintained as long as needed.
The permanent establishment of a low inflation environment will affect macroeconomic and financial stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, the beginning of 3 reverse currency substitution, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
Bottled gas prices also rose in parallel to the increase in LPG prices.
In crude oil markets, where a volatile course prevails, prices have increased as a result of supply-side decisions.
Prices of most items under services tend to decelerate owing to the monetary tightening, yet rents maintain an elevated course.
Aggregate demand conditions increasingly support disinflation.
Core inflation indicators continued with a downward course amid cost and demand-side developments, while prices of services remained mild.
Annual unprocessed food inflation accelerated to 6.71 percent, due to rising prices of fresh fruits and vegetables as well as higher milk and red meat prices.
Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) has been presenting the inflation outlook under alternative scenarios for food and energy prices since the second quarter of the year.
In other words, the risk of disrupting pricing behavior of the entire economy has emerged.
In light of these assessments, the Committee judged that inflation would display a rapid fall in the forthcoming period.
However, the Committee members have also underscored that available data is not long enough to make a healthy assessment, as the effects of the measures would be observed with some lag.
Demand and Production 14.
In tandem with the higher rate of contract renewals in August, rent inflation increased somewhat and remained strong.
On the other hand, energy prices continued with a relatively favorable path with an annual increase of 4.62 percent.
In other words, although policy rates remained unchanged, the real rates have continued to increase.
Monthly price increases were shaped by the rise in municipal water tariffs and increased fuel prices due to exchange rate developments notwithstanding the fall in international oil prices.
The recent trend in oil prices indicates two-way risks, with the downside risks being more pronounced.
It was indicated that the auction amount could be reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist, which, in turn, could ease the need for further hikes in reserve requirements by reducing the liquidity injected to the market through foreign exchange purchases.
The Committee defines further tightening in two ways: a.
Accordingly, the MPC, taking into account the end-2021 forecast target, has decided to maintain the tight monetary policy stance decisively for an extended period until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and price stability.
Economic activity continues to recover amid increasing domestic demand.
The January results of the Survey of Market Participants suggested that inflation expectations decreased further.
Quarterly production in the fourth quarter materialized above the third quarter.
The effects of the earthquake in the first half of 2023 will be closely monitored.
Especially, mounting problems regarding sovereign debt of the euro area peripheral economies have increased the downside risks on the global economy.
Seasonally adjusted data suggest that non-farm employment posted a plausible increase in March 2013; yet remained incapable of covering the increase in labor force participation, which led to a rise in unemployment rates.
The lagged effects of exchange rate developments are predicted to put further pressure in May on the consumer prices, especially through durable goods.
As this development occurred at a time when the current account deficit widened and coincided with other perceptions of domestic uncertainty, the Turkish economy was affected more seriously than other developing countries.
In June, in line with the improvement in the foreign trade deficit, the annualized current account deficit decreased by USD 3.3 billion monthly to USD 56.5 billion.
Accordingly, the monthly growth limit for foreign currency commercial loans was reduced from 1.5% to 1% while the 2% monthly growth limit for Turkish lira commercial loans was differentiated as 2.5% for SME loans and 1.5% for other commercial loans.
Risks regarding the global economy remain.
Going forward, increased coordination of fiscal policy will also contribute significantly to this process.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, monthly consumer inflation decelerated significantly.
In particular, should the normalization process of the Fed’s policy-rate increase and the balance sheet downsizing prove faster than expected, the high risk appetite and low volatility cycle in financial markets may reverse.
In the forthcoming period, inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping the yield curve flat, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
Besides, the ongoing upward trend in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically industrial metals and agricultural commodities, increases the upward cost pressure on consumer inflation through producer inflation.
Although weak global outlook dampens the upside pressures on commodity prices, prevailing supply-side problems pose an upside risk in the short term regarding energy prices.
In this context, it is important that any needed tightening in the fiscal balance would be implemented through expenditure cuts rather than higher excise taxes.
Monetary policy in the past year has focused on alleviating the impact of the global financial crisis on the economic activity.
The deceleration in food inflation was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which plunged to -5.94 percent.
The most dramatic monthly increase was recorded in durable consumption goods.
Unprocessed food prices continued to support the decline in annual consumer inflation.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 30.6% above the average of the last ten years.
Despite a limited fall observed recently, bank loan rates are still above the previous year’s levels and continue to curb credit expansion.
Against this background, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) assessed that final domestic demand would have a sizeable contribution to growth in the first half of the year.
Recently, increasing domestic market liquidity coupled with improved external borrowing conditions has eased credit supply conditions.
The Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) will continue to monitor fiscal policy developments closely while formulating monetary policy.
In tobacco products, producer-driven price hikes were observed.
In the manufacturing sector, the trend of employment remains strong.
Accordingly, the contribution of energy prices to headline inflation is expected to come down considerably throughout 2009.
According to the September results of the Survey of Market Participants, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectation increased by 2.93 points from 42.01% to 44.94%, the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation rose by 1.33 points from 22.54% to 23.87%, and the five-year-ahead inflation expectation was revised downwards by 0.39 points from 10.42% to 10.03%.
Services inflation resumed its downward trend in December thanks to favorable developments in the prices of rent and transportation services.
The Committee expects that core inflation indicators would increase in April as well, owing to the temporary tax cuts of the previous year, but would continue to remain at levels below the target.
In this context, the Committee was briefed on limits, interest rates and past implementations of Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets-Foreign Exchange Deposit Market.
After falling to 8.6% in October, unemployment rate rose to 9% in November, while posting a quarterly decline of 0.4 percentage points to 8.8%.
Services prices increased by 12.70% in January, and the group's annual inflation rose by 6.93 points to 62.42%.
Tight monetary stance will be maintained until a significant and sustained decline in the underlying trend of monthly inflation is observed, and inflation expectations converge to the projected forecast range.
It was stated that, given the developments in cost and demand factors, core inflation would remain at levels below the year-end target and consistent with the medium-term targets.
Should financial conditions tighten more than expected, the CBRT will continue to use required reserves and other liquidity tools to support markets.
Our forecasts suggest that, in such a case, medium term inflation targets could be undershot even with a measured sequel of policy rate cuts throughout 2009.
According to Committee members, another significant risk relating to the upcoming period is the possibility of deterioration in pricing behaviors.
The Committee supports building strong policy coordination and a holistic macro policy mix involving all stakeholders in order to achieve price stability.
Excess liquidity is sterilized using reserve requirements and the toolset that was expanded in the last MPC meeting period.
Recent accommodative measures and incentives are projected to stimulate a rebound in domestic demand starting from the last quarter.
The rise in the non-farm employment in this period was triggered mainly by the industrial sector, which settled on a trend of recovery in the last quarter of 2012.
Improvement in the expectations should continue in the upcoming period as the inflation keeps declining.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affect inflation outlook favorably.
Although there have been signs of a partial recovery in economic activity, there is no sign of improvement in labor market conditions.
On the services front, annual inflation was relatively flat for transportation services, but went up in other subcategories, especially in restaurants-hotels.
The gross international reserves of the Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye (CBRT) increased by USD 2.44 billion compared to the previous MPC meeting period to USD 126.3 billion as of 19 April 2024.
Meanwhile, the increase made in prices of natural gas used in industry has had a negative impact on production costs.
The energy prices in CPI are expected to rise further in March.
According to the monthly price developments, price hikes seen in the other services group items that are inclined to backward-indexation, that reflect the exchange rate effect, and whose prices are set according to the re-valuation rate were noteworthy.
Having picked up due to hikes in electricity tariffs during October, energy prices continued to rise in November in line with international oil prices.
This development stands as another factor that might tighten the supply of  credit.
Moreover, the Committee has indicated that 5 percentage points of inflation, which was at 8.62 percent as of October, can be attributed to the direct effects of the unprocessed food and tobacco prices, which are both expected to decelerate in the forthcoming period.
Hence, core inflation indicators remained elevated in October.
In seasonally adjusted terms, monthly increases slowed in both B and C indices, being more pronounced in the latter, compared to the previous month.
Since this was an expected development as described in the Inflation Report, inflation figures in February did not necessitate a major change in the medium-term perspective of monetary policy.
Therefore, given the cumulative easing in monetary policy since November 2008, the Committee envisages that the next rate cut may be measured.
However, the Committee has kept its view that the current policy framework and the decline in commodity prices would contain the widening in the current account deficit.
Although the group’s annual inflation decreased mostly owing to the base effect, prices surged across durables.
Considering the rapid rise of the Turkish economy’s level of integration with the world, it is anticipated that the said mechanism will continue to contribute to the disinflation process in the upcoming period.
The export volume index excluding gold rose again in March and hovered above its average in the previous quarter.
Noting that demand and cost side inflationary effects persisted, the Committee maintained its assessment that the risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report were on the upside.
The 12-month cumulative figures reveal that the foreign trade deficit rose compared to the previous month.
The projections presented in last month’s Inflation Report were based on the assumption that no sharp turn would emerge in international liquidity conditions and that the New Turkish lira would continue to contribute to the disinflation process by retaining its strong position.
Following the decline in January, expectations on domestic new orders have assumed a gradual recovery trend.
In October, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 1.56 points to 16.51%.
Developments in international prices as well as the exchange rate have an adverse effect on the trend inflation, particularly in food and core goods groups.
Since the previous MPC meeting period, Turkish lira commercial loan rates stood at 52.9% with a moderate increase.
Inflation expectations decreased in November.
Consumer prices rose by 1.18%, and annual inflation decreased by 20.12 points to 64.27% in December.
Moreover, an outcome whereby global economic problems intensify and contribute to a contraction of domestic economic activity, may require an easing in all policy instruments.
Underlying trends of core inflation indicators registered some increase in this period.
As the seasonal sale in the clothing group in the last two months lagged behind that in the previous year, the annual rate of price increase trended upwards.
Moreover, the ongoing uncertainties related to government spending constitute an upside risk to aggregate demand and inflation.
Thus, the annual rate of increase in prices of core goods (goods excluding food, energy, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) slowed to a record 1.25 percent.
In fact, according to BTS results, there is a growing number of firms that consider their production capacity as “more than sufficient” in view of their current order books and demand expectations.
Annual inflation was down across all main categories, particularly in durable goods.
In April, consumer prices increased by 7.25%, and annual inflation surged by 8.83 points to 69.97%.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect.
On the other hand, processed food inflation sustained its high course also due to prices in the bread-cereals group.
Meanwhile, processed food prices continued to ease in June, running close to year-ago levels.
Accordingly, further measures were taken to support the FX liquidity, core liabilities and long-term borrowing.
The downtrend in transport prices is likely to become more pronounced in the upcoming period.
In this respect, shorter episodes of additional monetary tightening may also be implemented, when necessary.
The measures taken by the Central Bank in June will ease pressures on inflation in the upcoming period.
Although inflation expectations after worsening during the post-financial turbulence period in mid-2006 have recently gained a positive outlook, medium-term expectations are still above the targets.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) discussed the medium-term projections to be published in the January Inflation Report.
The annual rate of increase in food and non-alcoholic beverage prices decelerated by 2 percentage points to 13.33 percent.
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 35% to 40%.
The decline in energy prices continued at a stronger pace in line with the international oil prices.
Lagged effects of monetary tightening since the second half of 2006 seems to have curtailed the unit labor costs in the overall economy, primarily in the services sector.
Consumer inflation outlook for January was marked mainly by the significant rise in services inflation due to the wage and administered price adjustments, and backward indexation behavior.
The upward trend in clothing and footwear prices has persisted since the beginning of the year, and annual inflation climbed by 3.63 points to 10.96% in April with the arrival of the new season.
Although strong domestic currency limits the impact of oil prices on domestic prices, past cumulative increases in oil prices require caution for second round effects.
Since June 2023, net portfolio inflows have totaled USD 5.89 billion, USD 2.27 billion of which was directed towards the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 3.62 billion towards the equity market.
While private consumption and investment demand shows signs of recovery, external demand has been moderating and aggregate demand conditions have continued to support the disinflation process.
Downward trend in unit labor costs in the manufacturing industry confirms this view.
At the same time, while tax measures to restore fiscal balances led to a marked increase in compulsory traffic insurance premiums and notary public fees in July, inflation in services is expected to slow further in the forthcoming period.
In July, prices of durable goods edged down by 0.11%, while annual inflation thereof registered a decline by 3.68 points to 27.18%.
Inflation expectations increased in March.
On the other hand, while domestic demand lost some momentum, the increase in inflation expectations slowed down.
Substantial economic measures are introduced to avoid any permanent damage to employment, supply chains and output capacity.
The Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism and implement additional measures.
In this framework, it is expected that the increases in productivity will persist in the last quarter of the year, as well and that unit wages in the manufacturing industry will continue to support the disinflation process.
Services inflation remained moderate in April.
For this reason, central banks all over the world take measures to reduce inflation.
Domestic investment demand remains weak.
Being affected by the exchange rate developments, core goods inflation followed an upward course, while services inflation remained high.
Although energy prices continued to rise in September, at a much higher rate than the past few months due to soaring crude oil prices, they still supported the disinflation process in the first nine months of the year.
In order to contain the impact of these developments on the pricing behavior, the Committee decided to strengthen the cautious stance and reduce the volatility of short term money market rates.
Favorable developments in the prices of other goods and services suggest that this recent increase in annual inflation rate would be temporary.
Inflation is expected to decline significantly in January and remain below the end-year target of 5.5 percent in the first quarter, before displaying a volatile path starting with the second quarter.
Inflation expectations continue to improve in November, albeit at a slower pace.
The rise in producer prices and the pressure it exerts on consumer prices have become more pronounced on a global scale, including advanced economies.
Additionally, commercial loans grow faster than consumer loans in line with the desired loan composition.
Lingering tight financial conditions maintain the downside risks to the magnitude and duration of the slowdown in economic activity.
Third-quarter average of the CNBC-e consumption index is above its second-quarter level, and consumer confidence indices confirm the modest recovery in consumption demand.
In fact, the rising EU demand has had a favorable effect on exports recently, which is conducive for both economic growth and rebalancing prospects.
Amid the sustained favorable outlook in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables compared to the seasonal averages, unprocessed food inflation went down to 13.21 percent in February.
In the other services subgroup, prices rose moderately by 1.73%, indicating an ongoing slowdown in this group.
However, annual inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables registered a decline.
In this regard, although disinflation is expected to become more significant in the upcoming period, the Committee, with a medium term perspective, decided to keep the policy rates unchanged against the risks such as the gap between inflation expectations and targets, the backward looking pricing behavior, elevated oil prices, prevailing uncertainties, and the stickiness related to services price inflation.
Effects of exchange rate developments were apparent in many items, particularly on core goods, while items with relatively low exchange rate pass-through also recorded noticeable price hikes.
Accordingly, the 12-month cumulative current account deficit is projected to widen in December.
As foreseen in the summary of the previous Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) Meeting, annual inflation continued to decelerate in September, following a temporary rise in August.
This is expected to create a slight increase in the current account deficit.
The Committee indicated that the recovery in credit would be slow, reflecting tight financial conditions both in domestic and external terms.
The inflation outlook is projected to improve gradually starting from the last months of the year, yet the pace and quality of this improvement will be monitored closely.
Labor market data is relatively weak.
In this period, as the three-month average increases in core indicators B and C remain flat, the underlying trend of inflation is not expected to display a significant change.
Having surged in the last two months, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages climbed to 9.69 percent due to the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Although investment remains weak, tendencies for investment and employment including that of small and medium-sized firms are recovering.
More specifically, prices soared at a much faster rate than historical averages across core goods excluding clothing and durables.
According to the preliminary data, price increases in the food group were stronger compared to the previous month, but slowed down in other groups, particularly in the services group.
In addition to the recovery trend in the Euro area, high market shifting flexibility supports exports.
The price developments in April can be evaluated from two different aspects; monthly and annual increases: a.
Higher prices of services and core goods put upward pressure on core inflation indicators.
If the fiscal policy significantly deviates from this framework leading to an adverse impact on the medium-term inflation outlook, the monetary policy stance may be revised.
According to preliminary data, price increases are strong in the energy group, despite some month-on-month deceleration, which is driven by the natural gas item.
Annual inflation increased in all subcategories.
The 4.24% increase signaled an acceleration in monthly rent inflation.
Prices in transport services recorded an uptick in July following the rise in fuel prices, which was mainly driven by tariffs for urban passenger transport and intercity passenger transport by road.
Leading indicators tracked through micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) imply that rent increases will fall due also to the decline in renewed contracts in October.
Excluding processed meat products, price movements were moderate across the group, while the deceleration of the price increase in bread and cereals was noticeable.
Energy prices fell by 4.99% in April, and annual energy inflation declined by 6.51 points to 3.30%.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium stood at 259 basis points on 22 July 2024, down by approximately 20 basis points from the previous MPC meeting week.
Registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations of manufacturing industry firms reveals a weakening in total demand, which is more pronounced for external demand.
Following the decisions made on June 25, the excess YTL liquidity in the market decreased significantly, and hence liquidity conditions tightened.
Leading indicators suggest that the rise in annual food inflation will continue in May due to unprocessed food prices.
The monthly increase of domestic producer prices at 8.23% was higher compared to the previous month, while annual producer inflation rose by 4.08 points to 44.50%.
Continued determination in implementing the decisive steps taken in these areas in recent years will increase the resilience of the economy against possible changes in the global conjuncture.
Similarly, one-month and 12-month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira, which declined noticeably in the same period remained flat in this MPC meeting period at 15.7 and 28.9 points, respectively.
Along with this outlook regarding the labor costs, the easing of oil and other commodity prices provides positive signals for the continuation of the disinflation process as well.
The Committee highlighted that loan growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions recently.
This was mainly driven by the rising prices of durable goods, particularly automobiles, reflecting the effects of the past depreciation in the Turkish lira.
Gold imports play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit due to monetary conditions and expectations.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to reduce the policy rate by 150 basis points.
The policy rate will be determined in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
The fall in the underlying trend of services inflation triggered by the items closely related to fuel prices contributed to this development.
End-year inflation may be lower than projected in the baseline scenario presented in the new Inflation Report, should the unprocessed food prices display a more favorable course than expected.
The improvement in credits in the first half of the year is monitored closely with regard to the extent of their impact on the aggregate demand and economic activity.
Although industrial production lost momentum in quarterly growth compared to previous quarters, its annual growth proved strong with 9.8 percent.
Annual inflation decreased across subgroups, more markedly in durable goods.
The Committee has noted that these developments are likely to have an adverse impact on Turkey’s economic activity in coming months, implying that it would take a while before industrial capacity utilization rates return to pre crisis levels.
The Committee has indicated that cutting the lower bound of the interest rate corridor will limit the appreciation pressures on the Turkish lira and thus contain macro financial risks.
The Committee evaluated the medium-term inflation forecasts for the July Inflation Report as well.
In addition to this outlook, the depreciation in the Turkish lira, the increasing volatility in exchange rates, and the widespread rise in wages are projected to exert additional cost pressures on inflation in the short run.
The slowdown tendency in the rise of commodity prices can be seen as a favorable development for future inflation.
While energy prices remained almost flat with only a 0.10% increase in April, annual energy inflation surged by 6.01 points to 18.44%.
The cautious stance will be maintained until the inflation outlook is in line with the medium term targets.
In this respect, timely implementation of the structural reforms envisaged by the Medium Term Program and European Union accession process remains to be of utmost importance.
High course of increase in the annual prices of services group continued in September as well.
Monetary Policy and Risks 10.
Recent credit surveys on the second quarter suggest that demand for both consumer and commercial loans has continued to increase.
These developments drove the industrial production down by 0.4 points in the first quarter.
Yet, we will not hesitate to tighten monetary policy in case of a significant worsening in the overall pricing behavior.
Put differently, the recent sharp declines in the core inflation measures have been primarily driven by the tax cuts, and therefore the rapid slowdown in these measures is expected to be temporary.
Leading indicators for the fourth quarter points to a moderate recovery in economic activity.
Besides the marked reduction in domestic demand, foreign demand has also significantly weakened due to the marked slowdown in global economic activity.
The Committee foresees that tighter liquidity policy along with the weaker capital inflows will slow down the credit growth.
It has become even more important to keep financial conditions supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment after the earthquake.
Prices in other services increased by 8.46%, with education services being the leading item following the hike in university tuition fees of 127.7%.
The trend of core indicators pointed to a more favorable inflation trend at the end of the year than projected in the last Inflation Report.
Consequently, the Committee stated that the extent and timing of possible future rate hike would depend on developments in global markets, external demand, fiscal policy implementation, and other factors affecting the medium term inflation outlook.
Monetary Policy 18.
Long-term interest rates are currently on the rise across advanced economies, while projections for policy rates are revised upwards.
However, considering the facts that the impact of the upward trend of non-interest public expenditures on the 2007 inflation is not clear and there exist other uncertainties regarding the monetary transmission mechanism, it should be borne in mind that the disinflation process may materialize at a slower pace than anticipated.
The Committee stated that adopting structural reforms may boost the economy’s growth potential to a large extent.
Interviews with firms, on the other hand, point to slight loss of momentum at the sectoral level due to the high rate of price increases.
Factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, monetary stance will be determined to keep inflation in line with the targeted path.
Notwithstanding temporary tax reductions, the cumulative TL depreciation caused the core goods inflation to soar, driving the annual inflation and underlying trend of core indicators higher.
Positive effects of the decline in fuel prices on the related groups of services continued with a slower pace in December.
Along with the decline in inflation in recent years, inflation targets have increasingly become a benchmark variable for pricing decisions.
Overall, the downtrend in inflation became more pronounced in the first quarter of 2009 on the back of the sharp contraction in economic activity.
In this regard, the Committee decided to implement a measured hike in policy rates to contain the potential second round effects.
Industrial production, which has been on the fall in seasonally adjusted terms since July, displayed a sharp contraction in the final quarter.
In contrast, the outlook regarding processed food prices remains favorable.
Elevated food prices continue to delay the improvement in the inflation outlook.
Thus, to reduce inflation to the 5-percent target permanently, all institutions must fulfill their duties under a holistic approach by also taking structural factors into account.
Thus, seasonally-adjusted indicators show a notable deterioration in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
Should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented through institutional and structural measures, rather than tax and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels throughout the forecast horizon.
The 3 gradual fall in the marginal funding rate has partially passed through to loan and deposit rates.
The falling food inflation led to a decrease in consumer inflation as well.
Preliminary data suggest that the rise in food prices has lost pace compared to previous months, while the lagged effects of wages, exchange rates and taxes on inflation have weakened significantly.
Leading indicators suggest that supply-side pressures on fresh fruit and vegetable prices faded in December.
As a consequence, seasonally-adjusted data indicated an increase in the underlying trend of core goods inflation.
Yet, the continued upsurge in food prices due to negative supply-side developments caused annual consumer inflation to remain above the forecast.
Accordingly, gearing the policy mix towards extending the maturities of the banking system liabilities would also help with regard to macroprudential risks.
Domestic demand conditions keep improving.
Core goods inflation rose to 10.09 percent in December.
Another major risk to the inflation outlook is a sharper than expected slowdown in the global economic activity, which, in turn, could lead to further volatility in financial markets.
Supported also by the recently enforced macroprudential measures, consumer loans displayed recovery in the last couple of months.
Public sector incomes policy is another important factor for the medium term inflation outlook.
In this regard, it is still unclear how long the measures taken to prevent the spread of the virus such as travel restrictions, lockdowns and social isolation will last, timing of these measures and how much they will affect consumer behavior and buying habits.
Other leading indicators signal that mild increases in non-farm employment will continue.
Signals for a wider sectoral spillover of the pickup in economic activity led by exporting sectors compared to the previous periods are important to a stable recovery in growth.
In 2018, in addition to the fading effect accommodative policies of 2017, the tight monetary stance and the fiscal measures under the MTP are likely to appear as the main drivers of loan growth and a normalized economic activity.
The non gold export volume index was down in October from the previous month, but its underlying trend is thought to be following an upward track similar to that of production data.
The annual rate of increase in prices of goods excluding energy and food declined to 5.52 percent, owing to ongoing discounts on clothing and footwear in September, in contrast with previous years.
The first-quarter data for 2017 hint at diminishing recovery in economic activity in the first quarter.
Recently released data indicate a deceleration in economic activity for the third quarter.
On the other hand, annual processed food inflation decreased further to 4.99 percent.
Overall, aggregate demand conditions will continue to support disinflation.
In addition, after a drought-driven persistent increase over the past twelve months, pulse prices finally declined in September, which was another key driver of the downward trend in unprocessed food prices.
Meanwhile, weakening domestic demand supported the overall slowdown in services inflation.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in March.
In sum, the recent lasting decline in global volatility and the effective use of the policy instruments laid out in the road map announced in August 2015 have reduced the need for a wide interest rate corridor.
Meanwhile, the depreciation in the Turkish lira pushed annual inflation in energy and core goods upwards.
Moreover, the three month Value Added Tax (VAT) cut on furniture and IT products announced in April will put some additional temporary downward pressure on durable goods inflation.
Such a development can be attributed to expectations that developed countries would continue to tighten their monetary policies in response to inflationary pressures arising from rapid expansion of global output.
The weakening in economic activity became more pronounced in April and spread across all sectors.
Accordingly, considering all factors affecting the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to make a more measured cut in the policy rate.
Ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy are expected to continue to restrain both the domestic and external demand for an extended period, putting downward pressure on inflation.
With the sizeable drop in December, the fall in domestic fuel prices reached a cumulative of 20 percent in five months.
Domestic demand, on the other hand, exhibits a modest upward trend driven mainly by consumption.
Meanwhile, consumption goods imports increased in April, limiting the improvement in the current account balance.
Against this backdrop, considering the impact of wage developments and the uncertainties in global markets on inflation expectations and the pricing behavior, and taking into account the volatility in energy and unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
The Committee emphasized that, within the inflation targeting framework, it will decisively use all of its policy tools in order to achieve and maintain price stability, by taking into account all factors affecting inflation and the increased risks.
In this context, the impact of the latest movements in exchange rates on prices is expected to diminish from August onwards.
In other words, it is inevitable that the fluctuations in exchange rates will influence inflation via direct cost channel in the short run.
Energy inflation continues to follow a favorable course, but will increase in December particularly due to sharp increases in LPG and bottled gas prices.
However, due to the reasons explained above, it should be borne in mind that the developments in January and February might be temporary.
While the possibility of a sharper than envisaged slowdown in global economic activity, through a portfolio shock and its potential impact on the exchange rates, may constitute an upside risk for the short-term inflation outlook, it also poses downside risks for inflation in the medium term through a possible weakening in external demand and domestic credit.
The Committee will react appropriately by revising the policy rates in case sudden changes in global liquidity conditions pose permanent challenges to inflation outlook.
In October, domestic producer prices rose 1.94%, while annual inflation went down by 8.05 percentage points to 39.4%.
The global growth outlook continues to dampen economic activity, particularly in sectors that are relatively more sensitive to foreign demand, such as export-oriented industrial sectors and related services sectors.
Moreover, the Committee emphasized that policy rates had been cut by 1025 basis points since November 2008, and thus, rather than focusing on the level of the policy rate in the current circumstances, it would be more important to keep rates at low levels for an extended period.
The correction in food prices has not reached desired levels yet, thus requires a cautious stance regarding the permanence of the sizeable decreases expected in June and July to result from the base effect in the group’s inflation.
Looking ahead, it is anticipated that developments in both the aggregate demand conditions and the real marginal costs will drive down inflation significantly in the forthcoming period, bringing inflation to the target levels sooner than envisaged.
The contribution of food prices to annual inflation continued to rise and reached 3.51 points in April.
Energy price inflation will continue to fall with the reduction in natural gas rates in February, which will have around 0.3 percentage points downward contribution to inflation.
Although prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 2.48% in January, annual inflation in the group decreased by 2.50 points to 18.11%.
Against this background, the Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) assessed that the decline in inflation might be subject to a temporary halt in September; but the downward trend in inflation will resume afterwards at a faster pace.
The accommodative policies of 2017 will have less of an effect in 2018 while the fiscal measures to be introduced within the context of the Medium Term Program and the tight monetary stance are expected to be the main drivers of loan growth and a normalized economic activity.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.96% in May, and annual inflation increased by 2.02 percentage points to 57.68%.
Accordingly, as announced in the press release dated September 21, 2024, reserve requirement ratios for Turkish lira (TRY) deposits have been raised from 12% to 15% for demand and notice deposits, as well as time deposits with maturities up to (and including) 3 months and from 8% to 10% for deposits with longer maturities.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) expects the growth composition to change in favor of domestic demand in the upcoming period.
Compared to the previous period, industrial and construction employment posted an upsurge, while the rise in services employment remained limited.
Annual inflation in services, which had been on the rise since March, moderated in October with the easing supply shocks and the weakening of domestic demand.
However, the Committee, highlighting the rapid pace of domestic demand, has stated that the impact of commodity prices on general price setting behavior should be closely monitored.
Annual inflation in clothing group maintained its rising trend.
Therefore, the establishment of a credible medium-term program ensuring fiscal discipline and debt sustainability would have an expansionary rather than contractionary impact on economic activity.
Accordingly, the spread between business loan rates and the policy rates have remained at significantly high levels.
Seasonally adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables increased by approximately 10% cumulatively in November and December.
In June 2022, the Current Account Balance registered a deficit of USD 3.5 billion, while the annualized current account deficit rose by USD 2.3 billion to USD 32.7 billion.
External demand remained strong.
Consequently, disinflation will be established in the second half of 2024.
Annual rent inflation continued to trend steadily down, declining to an unprecedented low of 4.21 percent since the inception of the CPI.
The annual rate of increase in goods excluding energy and food climbed to 4.79 percent in July, largely due to tax adjustments, as stated in the previous Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting.