Declining interests and extending maturities in line with the normalization process of the economy and the deterioration in inflation expectations lead to a reduction in domestic government borrowing and support the credit supply by changing banks’ portfolio preferences.
Prices of unprocessed foods, which usually decrease in summer, have the potential to positively affect inflation in June and July.
It is expected that the slowdown in domestic demand, arising from the rise in loan rates, shortened maturities, decreased consumer confidence and increased foreign financing costs, would be more pronounced than the increase in foreign demand.
Even the high inflation figures in April did not change this view.
Moreover, the expanding tendency in labor supply in urban areas stemming from the structural transformation in demographic factors and the agricultural sector will continue to suppress labor costs.
Though this downward trend is not expected to reach stagnation level, it is predicted that growth rates will decline drastically compared to the first half of the year.
The continued rise in relative labor productivity in the manufacturing industry keeps restricting the unit labor costs.
It is predicted that transportation services prices, which are quite susceptible to oil prices, will contribute favorably to the inflation in the upcoming period.
Committee members highlighted the fact that the current level of the credit interest rates, which are the most important determinant of domestic demand, is considerably high compared to the first half of 2006 and assessed that this development will continue to constrain the credit demand of individuals and firms in the upcoming period.
The decline in inflation expectations has continued to tighten the monetary conditions in the last quarter of 2006.
Although a slowdown in the global economic growth or a further easing in commodity prices could have an immediate adverse impact on domestic inflation through its impact on the global risk appetite, it will also lead to a positive terms of trade shock and thus to a more favorable outlook in the medium term.
In this respect, inflation is expected to further decelerate owing to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening, notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food prices.
Although energy prices continued to rise in September, at a much higher rate than the past few months due to soaring crude oil prices, they still supported the disinflation process in the first nine months of the year.
The Committee assessed that the impact of these rate hikes on inflation would be temporary.
Notwithstanding the risks related to energy and food prices, inflation is expected to decelerate in the medium term owing to the lagged effects of strong monetary tightening.
The turmoil in global financial markets and its likely impact on the domestic economy signal that the slowdown in the construction industry may continue.
Another major risk to the inflation outlook is a sharper than expected slowdown in the global economic activity, which, in turn, could lead to further volatility in financial markets.
Committee (The Committee) noted that inflation will remain elevated in the short term owing to lagged pass-through from exchange rates and supply shocks, yet it will start decelerating by the last quarter of 2008. .
Consequently, inflation forecasts, which incorporate the revised assumptions for oil and food prices, suggest that inflation will stay at high levels for a short period before gradually moderating towards the 7.5 percent target by the end of 2009.
Regarding the monetary tightening since May, the Committee indicated that the current level of the policy rate was supportive of disinflation.
Depending on the impact of the ongoing financial turmoil on the domestic economy, the Committee will consider measured rate cuts as well as temporary tightening through active liquidity management.
Although the widening output gap should contain the second round effects of the supply shocks, the exact pace of disinflation would still depend on the extent new inflation targets serve as a reference for economic agents.
The slowdown in economic activity will moderate tax revenues, and hence create downside risks on budgetary revenues.
Latest forecasts suggest that ongoing problems in international credit markets and the global economy will last longer than previously envisaged.
In line with the baseline scenario at the January Inflation Report, the Committee stated that the amount of the next rate cut would likely be less than the current one and reiterated that the extent and the timing of a possible future rate cut would depend on the factors affecting the inflation outlook.
In this context, the Committee underscored the importance of maintaining the smooth functioning of the financial system and the efficient operation of credit markets, and reached a consensus on implementing additional measures regarding the foreign exchange liquidity.
Strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and structural reform agenda is critical for facilitating expectations management and also for enhancing the simulative impact of the monetary accommodation.
The Committee members have noted that budget revenues have been declining in line with the slowdown in economic activity while expenditures have been accelerating due to counter cyclical fiscal policy.
Therefore, strengthening the commitment to fiscal discipline and the structural reform agenda is also critical for facilitating expectations management and for enhancing the simulative impact of the monetary accommodation.
However, it should be emphasized again that this impact will most likely disappear by the time these tax cuts expire, which are therefore expected to cause fluctuations in the core inflation measures over the short run.
Therefore, labor market conditions are expected to contain unit labor costs and curb domestic demand in the period ahead.
Put differently, the recent sharp declines in the core inflation measures have been primarily driven by the tax cuts, and therefore the rapid slowdown in these measures is expected to be temporary.
Therefore, the establishment of a credible medium-term program ensuring fiscal discipline and debt sustainability would have an expansionary rather than contractionary impact on economic activity.
The CBT has been taking the necessary measures at its disposal to contain the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic economy.
The unfavorable outlook continues for spending categories more sensitive to current income.
The Committee therefore stated that strong base effects could lead to a significant increase in annual inflation in the forthcoming period, especially in December; yet core inflation would remain at low levels.
The October Inflation Report had stated that the credit channel would begin to support domestic economic activity during the fourth quarter of the year.
Should the goals set out in the Medium Term Program be implemented through institutional and structural measures, rather than tax and administered price hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single digit levels throughout the forecast horizon.
Given the partial recovery in the labor market and expansionary monetary policy, private consumption demand may continue to rise gradually.
Since the last quarter of 2008, the CBT, without prejudice to its primary objective of price stability, has focused on containing the adverse effects of the global crisis on the domestic economy, and this task has been achieved to a large extent.
In this respect, the Committee emphasized that the marked increase in public spending is largely transitory.
The lagged effects of monetary easing on domestic demand have become more pronounced, while the weak outlook for global growth has continued to dampen resource utilization in the tradable sector.
The Committee stated that, should the global conditions deteriorate again, and consequently delay the domestic recovery, the policy rates would be kept constant for an extended period.
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the government debt, as implied by the fiscal rule, would facilitate the demand management and ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room to conduct countercyclical monetary policy.
The Committee indicated that the effects of the countercyclical monetary and fiscal policy have been increasingly evident on domestic demand.
Credit market developments also confirm that the recovery in domestic demand has been gaining traction.
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the government debt, as implied by the fiscal rule, would facilitate demand management and ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room to conduct countercyclical monetary policy.
The Committee expects that growing domestic demand and lower commercial loan rates would continue to support the investment recovery.
Using this fiscal space resulting from the cyclical factors mostly to reduce the government debt, as implied by the fiscal rule, would facilitate demand management and ease the need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more room to conduct countercyclical monetary policy.
Furthermore, ongoing problems in credit, real estate and labor markets across developed economies, with little policy options left in case of another disruption to global economic activity, suggest that the downside risks regarding the pace of global growth are likely to persist for some time.
Using this fiscal space mostly to reduce the government debt would facilitate demand management and reduce any need for indirect tax hikes, therefore providing more flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclical monetary policy.
Moreover, ongoing deposit growth and improving conditions regarding banks’ access to external credit are supportive for credit expansion.
Sustaining fiscal discipline in the period ahead as well is crucial, both in terms of providing more flexibility regarding the conduct of countercyclical monetary policy, and also for keeping the market interest rates at low levels permanently.
Should fiscal discipline be implemented through institutional and structural improvements, rather than indirect tax hikes, it would be possible to keep policy rates at single-digit levels over the medium- term.
The Committee expects the weakening in the economic activity and employment indicators in the third quarter to be temporary.
The weakness in global economic outlook not only delays the recovery in the external demand but also leads to further expansionary policies across developed economies, which in turn fuels domestic demand through the acceleration in capital inflows to emerging markets.
The possibility of a longer-than- anticipated period of slow global growth not only creates downside risks regarding external demand, but also suggests that short term capital inflows may remain strong.
The effects of the tightening measures on credit growth and domestic demand have become visible in the second quarter.
The Committee members highlighted the relative weakness in capital flows to emerging markets due to heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in some euroarea countries, and stated that it might be useful to revise the amount purchased via daily auctions.
It was indicated that the auction amount could be reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist, which, in turn, could ease the need for further hikes in reserve requirements by reducing the liquidity injected to the market through foreign exchange purchases.
Similarly, measures to be taken in the forthcoming period by other institutions in collaboration with the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) would also reduce the need for additional hikes in reserve requirement ratios.
The Committee members highlighted the persistence of relative weakness in capital flows towards emerging markets that is due to heightened concerns regarding debt sustainability problems in some euro area countries, and stated that, depending on circumstances, it might be useful to further revise the amount of foreign exchange purchases via daily auctions.
It was reminded that the auction amount could continue to be reduced gradually should the weakening in capital flows persist.
Especially, mounting problems regarding sovereign debt of the euro area peripheral economies have increased the downside risks on the global economy.
Amid the monetary tightening implemented since October and the ongoing global problems, domestic demand is expected to follow a moderate path in the forthcoming period, as suggested by recent trends in consumer loan growth and firms’ domestic orders.
The Committee also stated that restrictive effects of the ongoing slowdown in domestic demand and the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira on imports have become more evident.
The Committee members stated that domestic demand may recover in the forthcoming period with the improved risk appetite and increasing capital inflows.
Nevertheless, the ongoing downside risks on global economy may restrain employment growth in the period ahead.
Moreover, moderate pace of consumer credit growth suggests that financial conditions are tight as well.
In fact, despite the steps taken to resolve the problems in the euro area, outlook for credit markets and economic growth remain weak, and debt sustainability concerns continue.
Both the improved risk perceptions towards Turkey and the monetary stimulus package announced by the Bank of Japan suggest that capital inflows may remain strong in the forthcoming period.
On the other hand, the possibility of further delays in the global recovery and the continuation of quantitative easing policies for an extended period by the central banks of advanced economies remain as downside risks, in which case capital flows to emerging economies may re-accelerate.
In sum, while inflation is expected to start falling from August onwards as envisaged, pricing behavior is closely monitored.
Thus, the strategy to reduce policy rate uncertainty contributes greatly to the prevention of the economy from being dragged into a vicious circle that is not driven by economic fundamentals.
The Committee has indicated that materialization of such a scenario may prompt the Central Bank to take steps towards accumulating foreign exchange reserves.
The Committee indicated that decreasing the volatility of interest rates in response to the weakening capital flows would be help to contain the adverse effects of the uncertain global monetary policy on the domestic economy.
In sum, the Committee expects that inflation will continue to fall in the upcoming period but core inflation indicators will remain above the target for a while.
Any measure to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal discipline and reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
The sales of automobiles and home appliances recovered markedly thanks to more favorable financial conditions.
In sum, elevated food prices delay the improvement in the inflation outlook, yet falling commodity, especially oil, prices, are expected to support disinflation foreseen for the next year.
Similarly, the sales of automobiles and home appliances have picked up on the back of more favorable financial conditions.
On the other hand, the energy group continued to contribute favorably to consumer inflation with an annual increase of 4.25 percent.
The Committee stated that by limiting excessive consumption, the current growth composition of loans not only curbed inflation but also supported rebalancing.
Similarly, in a scenario where the external funding conditions tighten for banking sector, macro prudential policies might be implemented in a stabilizing way.
The decline in the underlying trend in inflation got more apparent in services, but remained relatively limited in core goods.
Yet, with improved financial conditions and income effect of falling oil prices, domestic demand may see some recovery.
This fall was mainly driven by energy and food prices, and inflation lost pace in almost all sub-groups except services.
Having the foreseen decline in inflation to be more persistent is important for maintaining the progress made in inflation over the last decade.
The Committee assesses that that the partial recovery in food prices accompanied by the cautious monetary policy will limit the deterioration in the inflation outlook and inflation will reach the target in the medium term.
The recent increase in relative prices of investment and durable goods will curb the demand in these sectors.
Inflation is expected to hover around current levels for some time due to the effects of the exchange rates and start declining afterwards.
Against this background, confidence channel is expected to boost domestic demand in the upcoming period.
In the upcoming period, domestic demand is likely to be supported by the income channel through wage increases and the low course of oil prices, and by the confidence channel through waning domestic uncertainties.
The need for such an instrument would be reduced, should the decline in global volatility prove persistent.
In the upcoming period, domestic demand is likely to be supported by the income channel through wage increases and low oil prices.
Risk weight and minimum wage arrangements and improving financial conditions are likely to boost loan growth in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
Risk weight arrangements and wage developments are expected to boost loan growth further in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
Meanwhile, commodity prices are also expected to become gradually less supportive of the current account deficit in coming months.
However, the ongoing slump in the tourism sector poses a downside risk to economic activity and the current account balance.
The gradual fall in the marginal funding rate spilled over into loan and deposit rates remarkably, yet loan-deposit spreads remain high, and loan standards exercised by banks have not eased.
In light of actual data and leading indicators, unemployment rates are anticipated to surge in the third quarter.
However, domestic demand is envisaged to pick up in the upcoming period on the back of less uncertainty, restored producer and consumer confidence, incentives stimulating domestic demand and recovering consumer loans.
Moreover, the public sector is likely to provide an increased investment support for growth in the fourth quarter.
Domestic demand is envisaged to pick up in the upcoming period on the back of incentives stimulating domestic demand and recovering consumer loans.
Any measure to provide permanent fiscal discipline and to reduce the savings deficit will support macroeconomic stability and contribute positively to social welfare by keeping the interest rates of long-term government securities at low levels.
Moreover, the public sector is expected to provide further investment support to growth in the coming months.
The data on mortgage and auto markets accompanied by the recent recovery in consumer loans bolster the projections for a gradual improvement.
The increased likelihood of the adoption of protective policies in the US following the elections poses a downside risk to the pace of growth and employment in emerging economies.
Recent indicators show that the TL depreciation and the confidence channel have led to a deceleration in domestic demand.
Inflation is expected to reach the highest levels in April- May particularly due to the base effect from unprocessed food and the lagged effects of the exchange rate, and then to fall thereafter as the impact of last year’s price increases in energy, alcohol-tobacco products and food gradually diminishes.
Aggregate demand conditions on which medium-term inflation forecasts are based, continue to have a disinflationary effect albeit at a more limited extent in comparison with the January Report.
The favorable effects of the monetary tightening on inflation have become visible.
The room provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of expansionary fiscal policy.
The room provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of an expansionary fiscal policy.
The room 4 provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of an expansionary fiscal policy.
The risks to the global economic outlook are tilted to the downside for the upcoming period.
Prospects for exports and tourism- linked activities seem relatively better, yet the stance for employment and investment has recorded an overall worsening.
In this respect, inflation is projected to be 23.5 percent at end-2018, and then fall to 15.2 2 percent at end-2019 and 9.3 percent at end-2020 before stabilizing around 5 percent in the medium term.
The fall in core goods inflation was mainly led by temporary tax cuts applied to durable goods.
All in all, the decline in core goods inflation in November is largely attributed to temporary tax cuts, while appreciation in the Turkish lira and weaker domestic demand emerged as other factors to support the slowdown in inflation.
In sum, the recent moderation in the Turkish lira as well as the weak domestic demand support the fall in consumer inflation, whereas cumulative cost pressures put a limit on better prospects.
Economic activity displays a slow pace due to tight financial conditions.
The recovery in the first quarter was driven by domestic demand, led by the accommodative stance of the public sector.
All these factors keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
Domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy continue to support disinflation.
Domestic demand conditions and the level of policy tightness continue to support disinflation.
As risk premium, exchange rate volatility and uncertainties have declined, improved financial conditions and accelerated loans have supported domestic demand in the last quarter of the year.
These developments keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive.
Turkey’s risk premium continued to decline owing to a cautious monetary policy stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as the accommodative monetary policy outlook in advanced economies.
Turkey’s country risk premium continued to decline owing to a cautious monetary policy stance and improved macroeconomic indicators as well as the accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies.
The Committee assesses that the unfavorable effects of the pandemic are temporary and the economy’s recovery, which is expected to be sooner and stronger for domestic demand, will start as of the second half of the year.
The energy group was the main driver of the fall in consumer inflation, whereas the food group hindered a more positive outlook.
Despite the monthly price increase, group’s annual inflation declined owing to the base effect led by the adjustment in electricity prices last year, which is among administered prices.
Despite the price hikes in furniture, automobiles and other electrical and non- electrical appliances, annual inflation was down by 5.65 points to 9.98% due to the base effects led by tax adjustments in the previous year.
Recently, positive expectations regarding monetary policy have been contributing to the decline in the country risk premium.
The Committee assessed that the permanent establishment of a low inflation environment will affect macroeconomic and financial stability positively through the fall in country risk premium, reversal in the dollarization trend, accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and the perpetual decline in financing costs.
The decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening implemented in November and December MPC meetings on credit and domestic demand is expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on inflation are envisaged to wane gradually.
The decelerating impact of the strong monetary tightening on credit and domestic demand is expected to become more significant; hence the effects of demand and cost factors on inflation are envisaged to wane gradually.
It should be emphasized that despite the recent adjustments, the sliding-scale practice continues to limit price increases both directly and indirectly.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively pursued for achieving sustainable price and financial stability once global peace is restored and base effects are ceased.
Although recently released data point to a stronger economic activity than anticipated, recession concerns in developed economies as a result of geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes continue, and conditions threatening financial stability have emerged.
Although recently released data point to a stronger economic activity than anticipated, recession concerns in developed economies as a result of geopolitical risks and interest rate hikes continue, and conditions threatening financial stability, triggered by successive bank failures, have emerged.
Thus, the outlook for energy costs, which had been supporting the inflation outlook for a long time, reversed in this month.
In sum, current global supply conditions remain favorable for inflation.
Annual inflation decreased significantly in the energy group helped by the base effect, while displayed a more limited decrease in other main groups.
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose 2.78% in November, while annual inflation declined 4.83 percentage points to 67.2% in this group.
In this period, annual inflation realized as -5.9 in energy group remaining in the negative territory, while it remained relatively flat course at high rates in other main groups.
On the other hand, in order to support Turkish lira deposits, a Turkish lira share growth target for legal entities was set, while the Turkish lira share growth targets for real persons were calibrated according to current trends and the commission rates to be applied in case of failure to 1 achieve these targets were increased.
In addition to its direct effects, the food group continued to have a negative impact on headline inflation indirectly through catering services.
Monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
In this context, monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
The underlying trend of monthly inflation registered a limited decline in April.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, the central banks of some advanced economies also started to cut rates.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, the central banks of some advanced economies also began to cut rates.
Even though the ongoing improvement in the inflation outlook and the recent developments regarding services inflation strengthen expectations for rate cuts, central banks of advanced economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate-cuts.
Accordingly, as of 22 July, the minimum interest rate for new and renewed FX-Protected Deposit Accounts, was reduced from 80% to 70% of the policy rate and extra returns provided by banks were revoked.
While emerging economies (EMEs) continue to cut interest rates in a way to maintain monetary tightness, an additional number of central banks of advanced economies began to cut rates.
Even though the ongoing improvement in the inflation outlook and the recent developments regarding services inflation strengthen expectations for rate cuts, central banks of advanced economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts.
In August, consumer prices were up by 2.47%, while annual inflation fell by 9.81 percentage points to 51.97% due also to the high base effect.
According to the expectations of the real sector, the 12-month-ahead inflation expectations of firms declined from 55.0% in June to 53.8% in August, showing a limited improvement.
Central banks of both advanced and emerging economies are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.37% in September, and annual inflation dropped by 2.66 percentage points to 33.09% due also to the high base effect.
As advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
While advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continued the rate-cutting process, the US Federal Reserve's (Fed) communication of more limited easing for 2025 at its December meeting was noteworthy.
The central banks are expected to adopt a cautious approach in rate cuts in a way to maintain the favorable trend in the inflation outlook.
While advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, there is an increasing expectation that central banks will adopt a more cautious approach in their rate cuts due to the recent heightened global uncertainties.
While advanced and emerging economies (EMEs) continue the rate-cutting process, central banks are expected to maintain their cautious approach in rate cuts due to the recent heightened global uncertainties.
In February, consumer prices were up by 2.27% while annual inflation fell by 3.07 percentage points and stood at 39.05%.
Accordingly, it is expected that central banks will maintain their cautious approach in rate cuts.